To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States:

An appalling calamity has befallen the American people since their chosen
representatives last met in the halls where you are now assembled. We might
else recall with unalloyed content the rare prosperity with which
throughout the year the nation has been blessed. Its harvests have been
plenteous; its varied industries have thriven; the health of its people has
been preserved; it has maintained with foreign governments the undisturbed
relations of amity and peace. For these manifestations of His favor we owe
to Him who holds our destiny in His hands the tribute of our grateful
devotion.

To that mysterious exercise of His will which has taken from us the loved
and illustrious citizen who was but lately the head of the nation we bow in
sorrow and submission.

The memory of his exalted character, of his noble achievements, and of his
patriotic life will be treasured forever as a sacred possession of the
whole people.

The announcement of his death drew from foreign governments and peoples
tributes of sympathy and sorrow which history will record as signal tokens
of the kinship of nations and the federation of mankind.

The feeling of good will between our own Government and that of Great
Britain was never more marked than at present. In recognition of this
pleasing fact I directed, on the occasion of the late centennial
celebration at Yorktown, that a salute be given to the British flag.

Save for the correspondence to which I shall refer hereafter in relation to
the proposed canal across the Isthmus of Panama, little has occurred worthy
of mention in the diplomatic relations of the two countries.

Early in the year the Fortune Bay claims were satisfactorily settled by the
British Government paying in full the sum of 15,000 pounds, most of which
has been already distributed. As the terms of the settlement included
compensation for injuries suffered by our fishermen at Aspee Bay, there has
been retained from the gross award a sum which is deemed adequate for those
claims.

The participation of Americans in the exhibitions at Melbourne and Sydney
will be approvingly mentioned in the reports of the two exhibitions, soon
to be presented to Congress. They will disclose the readiness of our
countrymen to make successful competition in distant fields of enterprise.

Negotiations for an international copyright convention are in hopeful
progress.

The surrender of Sitting Bull and his forces upon the Canadian frontier has
allayed apprehension, although bodies of British Indians still cross the
border in quest of sustenance. Upon this subject a correspondence has been
opened which promises an adequate understanding. Our troops have orders to
avoid meanwhile all collisions with alien Indians.

The presence at the Yorktown celebration of representatives of the French
Republic and descendants of Lafayette and of his gallant compatriots who
were our allies in the Revolution has served to strengthen the spirit of
good will which has always existed between the two nations.

You will be furnished with the proceedings of the Bimetallic Conference
held during the summer at the city of Paris. No accord was reached, but a
valuable interchange of views was had, and the conference will next year be
renewed.

At the Electrical Exhibition and Congress, also held at Paris, this country
was creditably represented by eminent specialists, who, in the absence of
an appropriation, generously lent their efficient aid at the instance of
the State Department. While our exhibitors in this almost distinctively
American field of achievement have won several valuable awards, I recommend
that Congress provide for the repayment of the personal expenses incurred
in the public interest by the honorary commissioners and delegates.

No new questions respecting the status of our naturalized citizens in
Germany have arisen during the year, and the causes of complaint,
especially in Alsace and Lorraine, have practically ceased through the
liberal action of the Imperial Government in accepting our often-expressed
views on the subject. The application of the treaty of 1868 to the lately
acquired Rhenish provinces has received very earnest attention, and a
definite and lasting agreement on this point is confidently expected. The
participation of the descendants of Baron von Steuben in the Yorktown
festivities, and their subsequent reception by their American kinsmen,
strikingly evinced the ties of good will which unite the German people and
our own.

Our intercourse with Spain has been friendly. An agreement concluded in
February last fixes a term for the labors of the Spanish and American
Claims Commission. The Spanish Government has been requested to pay the
late awards of that Commission, and will, it is believed, accede to the
request as promptly and courteously as on former occasions.

By recent legislation onerous fines have been imposed upon American
shipping in Spanish and colonial ports for slight irregularities in
manifests. One case of hardship is specially worthy of attention. The bark
Masonic, bound for Japan, entered Manila in distress, and is there sought
to be confiscated under Spanish revenue laws for an alleged shortage in her
transshipped cargo. Though efforts for her relief have thus far proved
unavailing, it is expected that the whole matter will be adjusted in a
friendly spirit.

The Senate resolutions of condolence on the assassination of the Czar
Alexander II were appropriately communicated to the Russian Government,
which in turn has expressed its sympathy in our late national bereavement.
It is desirable that our cordial relations with Russia should be
strengthened by proper engagements assuring to peaceable Americans who
visit the Empire the consideration which is due to them as citizens of a
friendly state. This is especially needful with respect to American
Israelites, whose classification with the native Hebrews has evoked
energetic remonstrances from this Government.

A supplementary consular agreement with Italy has been sanctioned and
proclaimed, which puts at rest conflicts of jurisdiction in the case of
crimes on shipboard.

Several important international conferences have been held in Italy during
the year. At the Geographical Congress of Venice, the Beneficence Congress
of Milan, and the Hygienic Congress of Turin this country was represented
by delegates from branches of the public service or by private citizens
duly accredited in an honorary capacity. It is hoped that Congress will
give such prominence to the results of their participation as they may seem
to deserve.

The abolition of all discriminating duties against such colonial
productions of the Dutch East Indies as are imported hither from Holland
has been already considered by Congress. I trust that at the present
session the matter may be favorably concluded.

The insecurity of life and property in many parts of Turkey has given rise
to correspondence with the Porte looking particularly to the better
protection of American missionaries in the Empire. The condemned murderer
of the eminent missionary Dr. Justin W. Parsons has not yet been executed,
although this Government has repeatedly demanded that exemplary justice be
done.

The Swiss Government has again solicited the good offices of our diplomatic
and consular agents for the protection of its citizens in countries where
it is not itself represented. This request has, within proper limits, been
granted.

Our agents in Switzerland have been instructed to protest against the
conduct of the authorities of certain communes in permitting the emigration
to this country of criminals and other objectionable persons. Several such
persons, through the cooperation of the commissioners of emigration at New
York, have been sent back by the steamers which brought them. A continuance
of this course may prove a more effectual remedy than diplomatic
remonstrance.

Treaties of commerce and navigation and for the regulation of consular
privileges have been concluded with Roumania and Servia since their
admission into the family of European States.

As is natural with contiguous states having like institutions and like aims
of advancement and development, the friendship of the United States and
Mexico has been constantly maintained. This Government has lost no occasion
of encouraging the Mexican Government to a beneficial realization of the
mutual advantages which will result from more intimate commercial
intercourse and from the opening of the rich interior of Mexico to railway
enterprise. I deem it important that means be provided to restrain the
lawlessness unfortunately so common on the frontier and to suppress the
forays of the reservation Indians on either side of the Rio Grande.

The neighboring States of Central America have preserved internal peace,
and their outward relations toward us have been those of intimate
friendship. There are encouraging signs of their growing disposition to
subordinate their local interests to those which are common to them by
reason of their geographical relations.

The boundary dispute between Guatemala and Mexico has afforded this
Government an opportunity to exercise its good offices for preventing a
rupture between those States and for procuring a peaceable solution of the
question. I cherish strong hope that in view of our relations of amity with
both countries our friendly counsels may prevail.

A special envoy of Guatemala has brought to me the condolences of his
Government and people on the death of President Garfield.

The Costa Rican Government lately framed an engagement with Colombia for
settling by arbitration the boundary question between those countries,
providing that the post of arbitrator should be offered successively to the
King of the Belgians, the King of Spain, and the President of the Argentine
Confederation. The King of the Belgians has declined to act, but I am not
as yet advised of the action of the King of Spain. As we have certain
interests in the disputed territory which are protected by our treaty
engagements with one of the parties, it is important that the arbitration
should not without our consent affect our rights, and this Government has
accordingly thought proper to make its views known to the parties to the
agreement, as well as to intimate them to the Belgian and Spanish
Governments.

The questions growing out of the proposed interoceanic waterway across the
Isthmus of Panama are of grave national importance. This Government has not
been unmindful of the solemn obligations imposed upon it by its compact of
1846 with Colombia, as the independent and sovereign mistress of the
territory crossed by the canal, and has sought to render them effective by
fresh engagements with the Colombian Republic looking to their practical
execution. The negotiations to this end, after they had reached what
appeared to be a mutually satisfactory solution here, were met in Colombia
by a disavowal of the powers which its envoy had assumed and by a proposal
for renewed negotiation on a modified basis.

Meanwhile this Government learned that Colombia had proposed to the
European powers to join in a guaranty of the neutrality of the proposed
Panama canal--a guaranty which would be in direct contravention of our
obligation as the sole guarantor of the integrity of Colombian territory
and of the neutrality of the canal itself. My lamented predecessor felt it
his duty to place before the European powers the reasons which make the
prior guaranty of the United States indispensable, and for which the
interjection of any foreign guaranty might be regarded as a superfluous and
unfriendly act.

Foreseeing the probable reliance of the British Government on the
provisions of the Clayton-Bulwer treaty of 1850 as affording room for a
share in the guaranties which the United States covenanted with Colombia
four years before, I have not hesitated to supplement the action of my
predecessor by proposing to Her Majesty's Government the modification of
that instrument and the abrogation of such clauses thereof as do not
comport with the obligations of the United States toward Colombia or with
the vital needs of the two friendly parties to the compact.

This Government sees with great concern the continuance of the hostile
relations between Chile, Bolivia, and Peru. An early peace between these
Republics is much to be desired, not only that they may themselves be
spared further misery and bloodshed, but because their continued antagonism
threatens consequences which are, in my judgment, dangerous to the
interests of republican government on this continent and calculated to
destroy the best elements of our free and peaceful civilization.

As in the present excited condition of popular feeling in these countries
there has been serious misapprehension of the position of the United
States, and as separate diplomatic intercourse with each through
independent ministers is sometimes subject, owing to the want of prompt
reciprocal communication, to temporary misunderstanding, I have deemed it
judicious at the present time to send a special envoy accredited to all and
each of them, and furnished with general instructions which will, I trust,
enable him to bring these powers into friendly relations.

The Government of Venezuela maintains its attitude of warm friendship and
continues with great regularity its payment of the monthly quota of the
diplomatic debt. Without suggesting the direction in which Congress should
act, I ask its attention to the pending questions affecting the
distribution of the sums thus far received.

The relations between Venezuela and France growing out of the same debt
have been for some time past in an unsatisfactory state, and this
Government, as the neighbor and one of the largest creditors of Venezuela,
has interposed its influence with the French Government with the view of
producing a friendly and honorable adjustment.

I regret that the commercial interests between the United States and
Brazil, from which great advantages were hoped a year ago, have suffered
from the withdrawal of the American lines of communication between the
Brazilian ports and our own.

Through the efforts of our minister resident at Buenos Ayres and the United
States minister at Santiago, a treaty has been concluded between the
Argentine Republic and Chile, disposing of the long-pending Patagonian
boundary question. It is a matter of congratulation that our Government has
been afforded the opportunity of successfully exerting its good influence
for the prevention of disagreements between these Republics of the American
continent.

I am glad to inform you that the treaties lately negotiated with China have
been duly ratified on both sides and the exchange made at Peking.
Legislation is necessary to carry their provisions into effect. The prompt
and friendly spirit with which the Chinese Government, at the request of
the United States, conceded the modification of existing treaties should
secure careful regard for the interests and susceptibilities of that
Government in the enactment of any laws relating to Chinese immigration.

Those clauses of the treaties which forbid the participation of citizens or
vessels of the United States in the opium trade will doubtless receive your
approval. They will attest the sincere interest which our people and
Government feel in the commendable efforts of the Chinese Government to put
a stop to this demoralizing and destructive traffic.

In relation both to China and Japan some changes are desirable in our
present system of consular jurisdiction. I hope at some future time to lay
before you a scheme for its improvement in the entire East.

The intimacy between our own country and Japan, the most advanced of the
Eastern nations, continues to be cordial. I am advised that the Emperor
contemplates the establishment of full constitutional government, and that
he has already summoned a parliamentary congress for the purpose of
effecting the change. Such a remarkable step toward complete assimilation
with the Western system can not fail to bring Japan into closer and more
beneficial relationship with ourselves as the chief Pacific power.

A question has arisen in relation to the exercise in that country of the
judicial functions conferred upon our ministers and consuls. The
indictment, trial, and conviction in the consular court at Yokohama of John
Ross, a merchant seaman on board an American vessel, have made it necessary
for the Government to institute a careful examination into the nature and
methods of this jurisdiction.

It appeared that Ross was regularly shipped under the flag of the United
States, but was by birth a British subject. My predecessor felt it his duty
to maintain the position that during his service as a regularly shipped
seaman on board an American merchant vessel Ross was subject to the laws of
that service and to the jurisdiction of the United States consular
authorities.

I renew the recommendation which has been heretofore urged by the Executive
upon the attention of Congress, that after the deduction of such amount as
may be found due to American citizens the balance of the indemnity funds
heretofore obtained from China and Japan, and which are now in the hands of
the State Department, be returned to the Governments of those countries.

The King of Hawaii, in the course of his homeward return after a journey
around the world, has lately visited this country. While our relations with
that Kingdom are friendly, this Government has viewed with concern the
efforts to seek replenishment of the diminishing population of the islands
from outward sources, to a degree which may impair the native sovereignty
and independence, in which the United States was among the first to testify
a lively interest.

Relations of unimpaired amity have been maintained throughout the year with
the respective Governments of Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Denmark, Hayti,
Paraguay and Uruguay, Portugal, and Sweden and Norway. This may also be
said of Greece and Ecuador, although our relations with those States have
for some years been severed by the withdrawal of appropriations for
diplomatic representatives at Athens and Quito. It seems expedient to
restore those missions, even on a reduced scale, and I decidedly recommend
such a course with respect to Ecuador, which is likely within the near
future to play an important part among the nations of the Southern
Pacific.

At its last extra session the Senate called for the text of the Geneva
convention for the relief of the wounded in war. I trust that this action
foreshadows such interest in the subject as will result in the adhesion of
the United States to that humane and commendable engagement.

I invite your attention to the propriety of adopting the new code of
international rules for the prevention of collisions on the high seas and
of conforming the domestic legislation of the United States thereto, so
that no confusion may arise from the application of conflicting rules in
the case of vessels of different nationalities meeting in tidal waters.
These international rules differ but slightly from our own. They have been
adopted by the Navy Department for the governance of the war ships of the
United States on the high seas and in foreign waters, and, through the
action of the State Department in disseminating the rules and in
acquainting shipmasters with the option of conforming to them without the
jurisdictional waters of the United States, they are now very generally
known and obeyed.

The State Department still continues to publish to the country the trade
and manufacturing reports received from its officers abroad. The success of
this course warrants its continuance and such appropriation as may be
required to meet the rapidly increasing demand for these publications. With
special reference to the Atlanta Cotton Exposition, the October number of
the reports was devoted to a valuable collection of papers on the
cotton-goods trade of the world.

The International Sanitary Conference for which, in 1879, Congress made
provision assembled in this city early in January last, and its sessions
were prolonged until March. Although it reached no specific conclusions
affecting the future action of the participant powers, the interchange of
views proved to be most valuable. The full protocols of the sessions have
been already presented to the Senate.

As pertinent to this general subject, I call your attention to the
operations of the National Board of Health. Established by act of Congress
approved March 3, 1879, its sphere of duty was enlarged by the act of June
2 in the same year. By the last-named act the board was required to
institute such measures as might be deemed necessary for preventing the
introduction of contagious or infectious diseases from foreign countries
into the United States or from one State into another.

The execution of the rules and regulations prepared by the board and
approved by my predecessor has done much to arrest the progress of epidemic
disease, and has thus rendered substantial service to the nation.

The International Sanitary Conference, to which I have referred, adopted a
form of a bill of health to be used by all vessels seeking to enter the
ports of the countries whose representatives participated in its
deliberations. This form has since been prescribed by the National Board of
Health and incorporated with its rules and regulations, which have been
approved by me in pursuance of law.

The health of the people is of supreme importance. All measures looking to
their protection against the spread of contagious diseases and to the
increase of our sanitary knowledge for such purposes deserve attention of
Congress.

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury presents in detail a highly
satisfactory exhibit of the state of the finances and the condition of the
various branches of the public service administered by that Department.

The ordinary revenues from all sources for the fiscal year ending June 30,
1881, were:

From customs - $198,159,676.02

From internal revenue - 135,264,385.51

From sales of public lands - 2,201,863.17

From tax on circulation and deposits of national banks - 8,116,115.72

From repayment of interest by Pacific Railway companies - 810,833.80

From sinking fund for Pacific Railway companies - 805,180.54

From customs fees, fines, penalties, etc. - 1,225,514.86

From fees--consular, letters patent, and lands - 2,244,983.98

From proceeds of sales of Government property - 262,174.00

From profits on coinage - 3,468,485.61

From revenues of the District of Columbia - 2,016,199.23

From miscellaneous sources - 6,206,880.13

Total ordinary receipts - 360,782,292.57

The ordinary expenditures for the same period were:

For civil expenses - $17,941,177.19

For foreign intercourse - 1,093,954.92

For Indians - 6,514,161.09

For pensions - 50,059,279.62

For the military establishment, including river and harbor improvements
and arsenals - 40,466,460.55

For the naval establishment, including vessels, machinery, and
improvements at navy-yards - 15,686,671.66

For miscellaneous expenditures, including public buildings,
light-houses, and collecting the revenue - 41,837,280.57

For expenditures on account of the District of Columbia - 3,543,912.03

For interest on the public debt - 82,508,741.18

For premium on bonds purchased - 1,061,248.78

Total ordinary expenditures - 260,712,887.59

Leaving a surplus revenue of $100,069,404.98, which was applied as
follows:

To the redemption of--

Bonds for the sinking fund - $74,371,200.00

Fractional currency for the sinking fund - 109,001.05

Loan of February, 1861 - 7,418,000.00

Ten-forties of 1864 - 2,016,150.00

Five-twenties of 1862 - 18,300.00

Five-twenties of 1864 - 3,400.00

Five-twenties of 1865 - 37,300.00

Consols of 1865 - 143,150.00

Consols of 1867 - 959,150.00

Consols of 1868 - 337,400.00

Texan indemnity stock - 1,000.00

Old demand, compound-interest, and other notes - 18,330.00

And to the increase of cash in the Treasury - 14,637,023.93 -