To the Congress of the United States:

At the threshold of your deliberations I congratulate you upon the
favorable aspect of the domestic and foreign affairs of this Government.

Our relations with other countries continue to be upon a friendly footing.
With the Argentine Republic, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Denmark, Hayti,
Italy, Santo Domingo, and Sweden and Norway no incident has occurred which
calls for special comment. The recent opening of new lines of telegraphic
communication with Central America and Brazil permitted the interchange of
messages of friendship with the Governments of those countries.

During the year there have been perfected and proclaimed consular and
commercial treaties with Servia and a consular treaty with Roumania, thus
extending our intercourse with the Danubian countries, while our Eastern
relations have been put upon a wider basis by treaties with Korea and
Madagascar. The new boundary-survey treaty with Mexico, a trade-marks
convention and a supplementary treaty of extradition with Spain, and
conventions extending the duration of the Franco-American Claims Commission
have also been proclaimed.

Notice of the termination of the fisheries articles of the treaty of
Washington was duly given to the British Government, and the reciprocal
privileges and exemptions of the treaty will accordingly cease on July 1,
1885. The fisheries industries, pursued by a numerous class of our citizens
on the northern coasts, both of the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, are worthy
of the fostering care of Congress. Whenever brought into competition with
the like industries of other countries, our fishermen, as well as our
manufacturers of fishing appliances and preparers of fish products, have
maintained a foremost place. I suggest that Congress create a commission to
consider the general question of our rights in the fisheries and the means
of opening to our citizens, under just and enduring conditions, the richly
stocked fishing waters and sealing grounds of British North America.

Question has arisen touching the deportation to the United States from the
British Islands, by governmental or municipal aid, of persons unable there
to gain a living and equally a burden on the community here. Such of these
persons as fall under the pauper class as defined by law have been sent
back in accordance with the provisions of our statutes. Her Majesty's
Government has insisted that precautions have been taken before shipment to
prevent these objectionable visitors from coming hither without guaranty of
support by their relatives in this country. The action of the British
authorities in applying measures for relief has, however, in so many cases
proved ineffectual, and especially so in certain recent instances of needy
emigrants reaching our territory through Canada, that a revision of our
legislation upon this subject may be deemed advisable.

Correspondence relative to the Clayton-Bulwer treaty has been continued and
will be laid before Congress.

The legislation of France against the importation of prepared swine
products from the United States has been repealed. That result is due no
less to the friendly representations of this Government than to a growing
conviction in France that the restriction was not demanded by any real
danger to health.

Germany still prohibits the introduction of all swine products from
America. I extended to the Imperial Government a friendly invitation to
send experts to the United States to inquire whether the use of those
products was dangerous to health. This invitation was declined. I have
believed it of such importance, however, that the exact facts should be
ascertained and promulgated that I have appointed a competent commission to
make a thorough investigation of the subject. Its members have shown their
public spirit by accepting their trust without pledge of compensation, but
I trust that Congress will see in the national and international bearings
of the matter a sufficient motive for providing at least for reimbursement
of such expenses as they may necessarily incur.

The coronation of the Czar at Moscow afforded to this Government an
occasion for testifying its continued friendship by sending a special envoy
and a representative of the Navy to attend the ceremony.

While there have arisen during the year no grave questions affecting the
status in the Russian Empire of American citizens of other faith than that
held by the national church, this Government remains firm in its conviction
that the rights of its citizens abroad should be in no wise affected by
their religious belief.

It is understood that measures for the removal of the restrictions which
now burden our trade with Cuba and Puerto Rico are under consideration by
the Spanish Government.

The proximity of Cuba to the United States and the peculiar methods of
administration which there prevail necessitate constant discussion and
appeal on our part from the proceedings of the insular authorities. I
regret to say that the just protests of this Government have not as yet
produced satisfactory results.

The commission appointed to decide certain claims of our citizens against
the Spanish Government, after the recognition of a satisfactory rule as to
the validity and force of naturalization in the United States, has finally
adjourned. Some of its awards, though made more than two years ago, have
not yet been paid. Their speedy payment is expected.

Claims to a large amount which were held by the late commission to be
without its jurisdiction have been diplomatically presented to the Spanish
Government. As the action of the colonial authorities which has given rise
to these claims was admittedly illegal, full reparation for the injury
sustained by our citizens should be no longer delayed.

The case of the Masonic has not yet reached a settlement. Manila court has
found that the proceedings of which this Government has complained were
unauthorized, and it is hoped that the Government of Spain will not
withhold the speedy reparation which its sense of justice should impel it
to offer for the unusual severity and unjust action of its subordinate
colonial officers in the case of this vessel.

The Helvetian Confederation has proposed the inauguration of a class of
international treaties for the referment to arbitration of grave questions
between nations. This Government has assented to the proposed negotiation
of such a treaty with Switzerland.

Under the treaty of Berlin liberty of conscience and civil rights are
assured to all strangers in Bulgaria. As the United States have no distinct
conventional relations with that country and are not a party to the treaty,
they should, in my opinion, maintain diplomatic representation at Sofia for
the improvement of intercourse and the proper protection of the many
American citizens who resort to that country as missionaries and teachers.
I suggest that I be given authority to establish an agency and
consulate-general at the Bulgarian capital.

The United States are now participating in a revision of the tariffs of the
Ottoman Empire. They have assented to the application of a license tax to
foreigners doing business in Turkey, but have opposed the oppressive
storage tax upon petroleum entering the ports of that country.

The Government of the Khedive has proposed that the authority of the mixed
judicial tribunals in Egypt be extended so as to cover citizens of the
United States accused of crime, who are now triable before consular courts.
This Government is not indisposed to accept the change, but believes that
its terms should be submitted for criticism to the commission appointed to
revise the whole subject.

At no time in our national history has there been more manifest need of
close and lasting relations with a neighboring state than now exists with
respect to Mexico. The rapid influx of our capital and enterprise into that
country shows, by what has already been accomplished, the vast reciprocal
advantages which must attend the progress of its internal development. The
treaty of commerce and navigation of 1848 has been terminated by the
Mexican Government, and in the absence of conventional engagements the
rights of our citizens in Mexico now depend upon the domestic statutes of
that Republic. There have been instances of harsh enforcement of the laws
against our vessels and citizens in Mexico and of denial of the diplomatic
resort for their protection. The initial step toward a better understanding
has been taken in the negotiation by the commission authorized by Congress
of a treaty which is still before the Senate awaiting its approval.

The provisions for the reciprocal crossing of the frontier by the troops in
pursuit of hostile Indians have been prolonged for another year. The
operations of the forces of both Governments against these savages have
been successful, and several of their most dangerous bands have been
captured or dispersed by the skill and valor of United States and Mexican
soldiers fighting in a common cause.

The convention for the resurvey of the boundary from the Rio Grande to the
Pacific having been ratified and exchanged, the preliminary reconnoissance
therein stipulated has been effected. It now rests with Congress to make
provision for completing the survey and relocating the boundary monuments.

A convention was signed with Mexico on July 13, 1882, providing for the
rehearing of the cases of Benjamin Well and the Abra Silver Mining Company,
in whose favor awards were made by the late American and Mexican Claims
Commission. That convention still awaits the consent of the Senate.
Meanwhile, because of those charges of fraudulent awards which have made a
new commission necessary, the Executive has directed the suspension of
payments of the distributive quota received from Mexico.

Our geographical proximity to Central America and our political and
commercial relations with the States of that country justify, in my
judgment, such a material increase of our consular corps as will place at
each capital a consul-general.

The contest between Bolivia, Chile, and Peru has passed from the stage of
strategic hostilities to that of negotiation, in which the counsels of this
Government have been exercised. The demands of Chile for absolute cession
of territory have been maintained and accepted by the party of General
Iglesias to the extent of concluding a treaty of peace with the Government
of Chile in general conformity with the terms of the protocol signed in May
last between the Chilean commander and General Iglesias. As a result of the
conclusion of this treaty General Iglesias has been formally recognized by
Chile as President of Peru and his government installed at Lima, which has
been evacuated by the Chileans. A call has been issued by General Iglesias
for a representative assembly, to be elected on the 13th of January, and to
meet at Lima on the 1st of March next. Meanwhile the provisional government
of General Iglesias has applied for recognition to the principal powers of
America and Europe. When the will of the Peruvian people shall be
manifested, I shall not hesitate to recognize the government approved by
them.

Diplomatic and naval representatives of this Government attended at Caracas
the centennial celebration of the birth of the illustrious Bolivar. At the
same time the inauguration of the statue of Washington in the Venezuelan
capital testified to the veneration in which his memory is there held.

Congress at its last session authorized the Executive to propose to
Venezuela a reopening of the awards of the mixed commission of Caracas. The
departure from this country of the Venezuelan minister has delayed the
opening of negotiations for reviving the commission. This Government holds
that until the establishment of a treaty upon this subject the Venezuelan
Government must continue to make the payments provided for in the
convention of 1866.

There is ground for believing that the dispute growing out of the unpaid
obligations due from Venezuela to France will be satisfactorily adjusted.
The French cabinet has proposed a basis of settlement which meets my
approval, but as it involves a recasting of the annual quotas of the
foreign debt it has been deemed advisable to submit the proposal to the
judgment of the cabinets of Berlin, Copenhagen, The Hague, London, and
Madrid.

At the recent coronation of His Majesty King Kalakaua this Government was
represented both diplomatically and by the formal visit of a vessel of
war.

The question of terminating or modifying the existing reciprocity treaty
with Hawaii is now before Congress. I am convinced that the charges of
abuses and frauds under that treaty have been exaggerated, and I renew the
suggestion of last year's message that the treaty be modified wherever its
provisions have proved onerous to legitimate trade between the two
countries. I am not disposed to favor the entire cessation of the treaty
relations which have fostered good will between the countries and
contributed toward the equality of Hawaii in the family of nations.

In pursuance of the policy declared by this Government of extending our
intercourse with the Eastern nations, legations have during the past year
been established in Persia, Siam, and Korea. It is probable that permanent
missions of those countries will ere long be maintained in the United
States. A special embassy from Siam is now on its way hither.

Treaty relations with Korea were perfected by the exchange at Seoul, on the
19th of May last, of the ratifications of the lately concluded convention,
and envoys from the King of Chosen have visited this country and
received a cordial welcome. Korea, as yet unacquainted with the methods of
Western civilization, now invites the attention of those interested in the
advancement of our foreign trade, as it needs the implements and products
which the United States are ready to supply. We seek no monopoly of its
commerce and no advantages over other nations, but as the Chosenese, in
reaching for a higher civilization, have confided in this Republic, we can
not regard with indifference any encroachment on their rights.

China, by the payment of a money indemnity, has settled certain of the
long-pending claims of our citizens, and I have strong hopes that the
remainder will soon be adjusted.

Questions have arisen touching the rights of American and other foreign
manufacturers in China under the provisions of treaties which permit aliens
to exercise their industries in that country. On this specific point our
own treaty is silent, but under the operation of the most-favored-nation
clause we have like privileges with those of other powers. While it is the
duty of the Government to see that our citizens have the full enjoyment of
every benefit secured by treaty, I doubt the expediency of leading in a
movement to constrain China to admit an interpretation which we have only
an indirect treaty right to exact. The transference to China of American
capital for the employment there of Chinese labor would in effect
inaugurate a competition for the control of markets now supplied by our
home industries.

There is good reason to believe that the law restricting the immigration of
Chinese has been violated, intentionally or otherwise, by the officials of
China upon whom is devolved the duty of certifying that the immigrants
belong to the excepted classes.

Measures have been taken to ascertain the facts incident to this supposed
infraction, and it is believed that the Government of China will cooperate
with the United States in securing the faithful observance of the law.

The same considerations which prompted Congress at its last session to
return to Japan the Simonoseki indemnity seem to me to require at its hands
like action in respect to the Canton indemnity fund, now amounting to
$300,000.

The question of the general revision of the foreign treaties of Japan has
been considered in an international conference held at Tokyo, but without
definite result as yet. This Government is disposed to concede the requests
of Japan to determine its own tariff duties, to provide such proper
judicial tribunals as may commend themselves to the Western powers for the
trial of causes to which foreigners are parties, and to assimilate the
terms and duration of its treaties to those of other civilized states.

Through our ministers at London and at Monrovia this Government has
endeavored to aid Liberia in its differences with Great Britain touching
the northwestern boundary of that Republic. There is a prospect of
adjustment of the dispute by the adoption of the Mannah River as the line.
This arrangement is a compromise of the conflicting territorial claims and
takes from Liberia no country over which it has maintained effective
jurisdiction.

The rich and populous valley of the Kongo is being opened to commerce by a
society called the International African Association, of which the King of
the Belgians is the president and a citizen of the United States the chief
executive officer. Large tracts of territory have been ceded to the
association by native chiefs, roads have been opened, steamboats placed on
the river, and the nuclei of states established at twenty-two stations
under one flag which offers freedom to commerce and prohibits the slave
trade. The objects of the society are philanthropic. It does not aim at
permanent political control, but seeks the neutrality of the valley. The
United States can not be indifferent to this work nor to the interests of
their citizens involved in it. It may become advisable for us to cooperate
with other commercial powers in promoting the rights of trade and residence
in the Kongo Valley free from the interference or political control of any
one nation.

In view of the frequency of invitations from foreign governments to
participate in social and scientific congresses for the discussion of
important matters of general concern, I repeat the suggestion of my last
message that provision be made for the exercise of discretionary power by
the Executive in appointing delegates to such convocations. Able
specialists are ready to serve the national interests in such capacity
without personal profit or other compensation than the defrayment of
expenses actually incurred, and this a comparatively small annual
appropriation would suffice to meet.

I have alluded in my previous messages to the injurious and vexatious
restrictions suffered by our trade in the Spanish West Indies. Brazil,
whose natural outlet for its great national staple, coffee, is in and
through the United States, imposes a heavy export duty upon that product.
Our petroleum exports are hampered in Turkey and in other Eastern ports by
restrictions as to storage and by onerous taxation. For these mischiefs
adequate relief is not always afforded by reciprocity treaties like that
with Hawaii or that lately negotiated with Mexico and now awaiting the
action of the Senate. Is it not advisable to provide some measure of
equitable retaliation in our relations with governments which discriminate
against our own? If, for example, the Executive were empowered to apply to
Spanish vessels and cargoes from Cuba and Puerto Rico the same rules of
treatment and scale of penalties for technical faults which are applied to
our vessels and cargoes in the Antilles, a resort to that course might not
be barren of good results.

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury gives a full and interesting
exhibit of the financial condition of the country.

It shows that the ordinary revenues from all sources for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 1883, amounted to $398,287,581.95, whereof there was
received--

From customs - $214,706,496.93

From internal revenue - 144,720,368.98

From sales of public lands - 7,955,864.42

From tax on circulation and deposits of national banks - 9,111,008.85

From profits on coinage, bullion deposits, and assays - 4,460,205.17

From other sources - 17,333,637.60

Total - 398,287,581.95

For the same period the ordinary expenditures were:

For civil expenses - $22,343,285.76

For foreign intercourse - 2,419,275.24

For Indians - 7,362,590.34

For Pensions - 66,012,573.64

For the military establishment, including river and harbor
improvements and arsenals - 48,911,382.93

For the naval establishment, including vessels, machinery,
and improvements at navy-yards - 15,283,437.17

For miscellaneous expenditures, including public buildings,
light-houses, and collecting the revenue - 40,098,432.73

For expenditures on account of the District of Columbia - 3,817,028.48

For interest on the public debt - 59,160,131.25

Total - 265,408,137.54

Leaving a surplus revenue of $132,879,444.41, which, with an amount drawn
from the cash balance in the Treasury of $1,299,312.55, making
$134,178,756.96, was applied to the redemption--

Of bonds for the sinking fund - $44,850,700.00

Of fractional currency for the sinking fund - 46,556.96

Of funded loan of 1881, continued at 3 1\2 per cent - 65,380,250.00

Of loan of July and August, 1861, continued at 3 1/2 per cent -
20,594,600.00

Of funded loan of 1907 - 1,418,850.00

Of funded loan of 1881 - 719,150.00

Of loan of February, 1861 - 18,000.00

Of loan of July and August, 1861 - 266,600.00

Of loan of March, 1863 - 116,850.00

Of loan of July, 1882 - 47,650.00

Of five-twenties of 1862 - 10,300.00

Of five-twenties of 1864 - 7,050.00

Of five-twenties of 1865 - 9,600.00

Of ten-forties of 1864 - 133,550.00

Of consols of 1865 - 40,800.00

Of consols of 1867 - 235,700.00

Of consols of 1868 - 154,650.00

Of Oregon War debt - 5,450.00

Of refunding certificates - 109,150.00

Of old demand, compound-interest and other notes - 13,300.00

Total - 134,178,756.96

The revenue for the present fiscal year, actual and estimated, is as
follows:

Source - For the quarter ended September 30, 1883 (actual) - For the
remaining three quarters of the year (estimated)

From customs - $57,402,975.67 - $137,597,024.33

From internal revenue - 29,662,078.60 - 90,337,921.40

From sales of public lands - 2,932,635.17 - 5,067,634.83

From tax on circulation and deposits of national banks - 1,557,800.88 -
1,542,199.12

From repayment of interest and sinking fund, Pacific Railway companies -
521,059.51 - 1,478,940.49

From customs fees, fines, penalties, etc. - 298,696.78 - 901,303.22

From fees--consular, letters patent, and lands - 863,209.80 - 2,436,790.20

From proceeds of sales of Government property - 112,562.23 - 167,437.77

From profits on coinage, etc. - 950,229.46 - 3,149,770.54

From deposits for surveying public lands - 172,461.31 - 327,538.69

From revenues of the District of Columbia - 256,017.99 - 1,643,982.01

From miscellaneous sources - 1,237,189.63 - 2,382,810.37

Total receipts - 95,966,917.03 - 247,033,082.97

The actual and estimated expenses for the same period are:

Object - For the quarter ended September 30, 1883 (actual) - For the
remaining three quarters of the year (estimated)

For civil and miscellaneous expenses, including public buildings,
light-houses, and collecting the revenue - $15,385,799.42 - $51,114,200.58

For Indians - 2,623,390.54 - 4,126,609.46

For pensions - 16,285,261.98 - 53,714,738.02

For military establishment, including fortifications, river and harbor
improvements, and arsenals - 13,512,204.33 - 26,487,795.67

For naval establishment, including vessels and machinery, and improvements
at navy-yards - 4,199,299.69 - 12,300,700.31

For expenditures on account of the District of Columbia - 1,138,836.41 -
2,611,163.59

For interest on the public debt - 14,797,297.96 - 39,702,702.04

Total ordinary expenditures - 67,942,090.33 - 190,057,909.67

Total receipts, actual and estimated - $343,000,000.00

Total expenditures, actual and estimated - 258,000,000.00 -