



The Piazza Tales

by Herman Melville

Author of “Typee,” “Omoo,” etc., etc., etc.


New York;
Dix & Edwards, 321 Broadway.
London: Sampson Low, Son & Co.
Miller & Holman,
Printers & Stereotypers, N.Y.


1856


Contents

 The Piazza
 Bartleby
 Benito Cereno
 The Lightning-Rod Man
 The Encantadas
 The Bell-Tower


BENITO CERENO.


In the year 1799, Captain Amasa Delano, of Duxbury, in Massachusetts,
commanding a large sealer and general trader, lay at anchor with a
valuable cargo, in the harbor of St. Maria—a small, desert, uninhabited
island toward the southern extremity of the long coast of Chili. There
he had touched for water.

On the second day, not long after dawn, while lying in his berth, his
mate came below, informing him that a strange sail was coming into the
bay. Ships were then not so plenty in those waters as now. He rose,
dressed, and went on deck.

The morning was one peculiar to that coast. Everything was mute and
calm; everything gray. The sea, though undulated into long roods of
swells, seemed fixed, and was sleeked at the surface like waved lead
that has cooled and set in the smelter’s mould. The sky seemed a gray
surtout. Flights of troubled gray fowl, kith and kin with flights of
troubled gray vapors among which they were mixed, skimmed low and
fitfully over the waters, as swallows over meadows before storms.
Shadows present, foreshadowing deeper shadows to come.

To Captain Delano’s surprise, the stranger, viewed through the glass,
showed no colors; though to do so upon entering a haven, however
uninhabited in its shores, where but a single other ship might be
lying, was the custom among peaceful seamen of all nations. Considering
the lawlessness and loneliness of the spot, and the sort of stories, at
that day, associated with those seas, Captain Delano’s surprise might
have deepened into some uneasiness had he not been a person of a
singularly undistrustful good-nature, not liable, except on
extraordinary and repeated incentives, and hardly then, to indulge in
personal alarms, any way involving the imputation of malign evil in
man. Whether, in view of what humanity is capable, such a trait
implies, along with a benevolent heart, more than ordinary quickness
and accuracy of intellectual perception, may be left to the wise to
determine.

But whatever misgivings might have obtruded on first seeing the
stranger, would almost, in any seaman’s mind, have been dissipated by
observing that, the ship, in navigating into the harbor, was drawing
too near the land; a sunken reef making out off her bow. This seemed to
prove her a stranger, indeed, not only to the sealer, but the island;
consequently, she could be no wonted freebooter on that ocean. With no
small interest, Captain Delano continued to watch her—a proceeding not
much facilitated by the vapors partly mantling the hull, through which
the far matin light from her cabin streamed equivocally enough; much
like the sun—by this time hemisphered on the rim of the horizon, and,
apparently, in company with the strange ship entering the harbor—which,
wimpled by the same low, creeping clouds, showed not unlike a Lima
intriguante’s one sinister eye peering across the Plaza from the Indian
loop-hole of her dusk _saya-y-manta._

It might have been but a deception of the vapors, but, the longer the
stranger was watched the more singular appeared her manoeuvres. Ere
long it seemed hard to decide whether she meant to come in or no—what
she wanted, or what she was about. The wind, which had breezed up a
little during the night, was now extremely light and baffling, which
the more increased the apparent uncertainty of her movements.
Surmising, at last, that it might be a ship in distress, Captain Delano
ordered his whale-boat to be dropped, and, much to the wary opposition
of his mate, prepared to board her, and, at the least, pilot her in. On
the night previous, a fishing-party of the seamen had gone a long
distance to some detached rocks out of sight from the sealer, and, an
hour or two before daybreak, had returned, having met with no small
success. Presuming that the stranger might have been long off
soundings, the good captain put several baskets of the fish, for
presents, into his boat, and so pulled away. From her continuing too
near the sunken reef, deeming her in danger, calling to his men, he
made all haste to apprise those on board of their situation. But, some
time ere the boat came up, the wind, light though it was, having
shifted, had headed the vessel off, as well as partly broken the vapors
from about her.

Upon gaining a less remote view, the ship, when made signally visible
on the verge of the leaden-hued swells, with the shreds of fog here and
there raggedly furring her, appeared like a white-washed monastery
after a thunder-storm, seen perched upon some dun cliff among the
Pyrenees. But it was no purely fanciful resemblance which now, for a
moment, almost led Captain Delano to think that nothing less than a
ship-load of monks was before him. Peering over the bulwarks were what
really seemed, in the hazy distance, throngs of dark cowls; while,
fitfully revealed through the open port-holes, other dark moving
figures were dimly descried, as of Black Friars pacing the cloisters.

Upon a still nigher approach, this appearance was modified, and the
true character of the vessel was plain—a Spanish merchantman of the
first class, carrying negro slaves, amongst other valuable freight,
from one colonial port to another. A very large, and, in its time, a
very fine vessel, such as in those days were at intervals encountered
along that main; sometimes superseded Acapulco treasure-ships, or
retired frigates of the Spanish king’s navy, which, like superannuated
Italian palaces, still, under a decline of masters, preserved signs of
former state.

As the whale-boat drew more and more nigh, the cause of the peculiar
pipe-clayed aspect of the stranger was seen in the slovenly neglect
pervading her. The spars, ropes, and great part of the bulwarks, looked
woolly, from long unacquaintance with the scraper, tar, and the brush.
Her keel seemed laid, her ribs put together, and she launched, from
Ezekiel’s Valley of Dry Bones.

In the present business in which she was engaged, the ship’s general
model and rig appeared to have undergone no material change from their
original warlike and Froissart pattern. However, no guns were seen.

The tops were large, and were railed about with what had once been
octagonal net-work, all now in sad disrepair. These tops hung overhead
like three ruinous aviaries, in one of which was seen, perched, on a
ratlin, a white noddy, a strange fowl, so called from its lethargic,
somnambulistic character, being frequently caught by hand at sea.
Battered and mouldy, the castellated forecastle seemed some ancient
turret, long ago taken by assault, and then left to decay. Toward the
stern, two high-raised quarter galleries—the balustrades here and there
covered with dry, tindery sea-moss—opening out from the unoccupied
state-cabin, whose dead-lights, for all the mild weather, were
hermetically closed and calked—these tenantless balconies hung over the
sea as if it were the grand Venetian canal. But the principal relic of
faded grandeur was the ample oval of the shield-like stern-piece,
intricately carved with the arms of Castile and Leon, medallioned about
by groups of mythological or symbolical devices; uppermost and central
of which was a dark satyr in a mask, holding his foot on the prostrate
neck of a writhing figure, likewise masked.

Whether the ship had a figure-head, or only a plain beak, was not quite
certain, owing to canvas wrapped about that part, either to protect it
while undergoing a re-furbishing, or else decently to hide its decay.
Rudely painted or chalked, as in a sailor freak, along the forward side
of a sort of pedestal below the canvas, was the sentence, “_Seguid
vuestro jefe_” (follow your leader); while upon the tarnished
headboards, near by, appeared, in stately capitals, once gilt, the
ship’s name, “SAN DOMINICK,” each letter streakingly corroded with
tricklings of copper-spike rust; while, like mourning weeds, dark
festoons of sea-grass slimily swept to and fro over the name, with
every hearse-like roll of the hull.

As, at last, the boat was hooked from the bow along toward the gangway
amidship, its keel, while yet some inches separated from the hull,
harshly grated as on a sunken coral reef. It proved a huge bunch of
conglobated barnacles adhering below the water to the side like a wen—a
token of baffling airs and long calms passed somewhere in those seas.

Climbing the side, the visitor was at once surrounded by a clamorous
throng of whites and blacks, but the latter outnumbering the former
more than could have been expected, negro transportation-ship as the
stranger in port was. But, in one language, and as with one voice, all
poured out a common tale of suffering; in which the negresses, of whom
there were not a few, exceeded the others in their dolorous vehemence.
The scurvy, together with the fever, had swept off a great part of
their number, more especially the Spaniards. Off Cape Horn they had
narrowly escaped shipwreck; then, for days together, they had lain
tranced without wind; their provisions were low; their water next to
none; their lips that moment were baked.

While Captain Delano was thus made the mark of all eager tongues, his
one eager glance took in all faces, with every other object about him.

Always upon first boarding a large and populous ship at sea, especially
a foreign one, with a nondescript crew such as Lascars or Manilla men,
the impression varies in a peculiar way from that produced by first
entering a strange house with strange inmates in a strange land. Both
house and ship—the one by its walls and blinds, the other by its high
bulwarks like ramparts—hoard from view their interiors till the last
moment: but in the case of the ship there is this addition; that the
living spectacle it contains, upon its sudden and complete disclosure,
has, in contrast with the blank ocean which zones it, something of the
effect of enchantment. The ship seems unreal; these strange costumes,
gestures, and faces, but a shadowy tableau just emerged from the deep,
which directly must receive back what it gave.

Perhaps it was some such influence, as above is attempted to be
described, which, in Captain Delano’s mind, heightened whatever, upon a
staid scrutiny, might have seemed unusual; especially the conspicuous
figures of four elderly grizzled negroes, their heads like black,
doddered willow tops, who, in venerable contrast to the tumult below
them, were couched, sphynx-like, one on the starboard cat-head, another
on the larboard, and the remaining pair face to face on the opposite
bulwarks above the main-chains. They each had bits of unstranded old
junk in their hands, and, with a sort of stoical self-content, were
picking the junk into oakum, a small heap of which lay by their sides.
They accompanied the task with a continuous, low, monotonous, chant;
droning and drilling away like so many gray-headed bag-pipers playing a
funeral march.

The quarter-deck rose into an ample elevated poop, upon the forward
verge of which, lifted, like the oakum-pickers, some eight feet above
the general throng, sat along in a row, separated by regular spaces,
the cross-legged figures of six other blacks; each with a rusty hatchet
in his hand, which, with a bit of brick and a rag, he was engaged like
a scullion in scouring; while between each two was a small stack of
hatchets, their rusted edges turned forward awaiting a like operation.
Though occasionally the four oakum-pickers would briefly address some
person or persons in the crowd below, yet the six hatchet-polishers
neither spoke to others, nor breathed a whisper among themselves, but
sat intent upon their task, except at intervals, when, with the
peculiar love in negroes of uniting industry with pastime, two and two
they sideways clashed their hatchets together, like cymbals, with a
barbarous din. All six, unlike the generality, had the raw aspect of
unsophisticated Africans.

But that first comprehensive glance which took in those ten figures,
with scores less conspicuous, rested but an instant upon them, as,
impatient of the hubbub of voices, the visitor turned in quest of
whomsoever it might be that commanded the ship.

But as if not unwilling to let nature make known her own case among his
suffering charge, or else in despair of restraining it for the time,
the Spanish captain, a gentlemanly, reserved-looking, and rather young
man to a stranger’s eye, dressed with singular richness, but bearing
plain traces of recent sleepless cares and disquietudes, stood
passively by, leaning against the main-mast, at one moment casting a
dreary, spiritless look upon his excited people, at the next an unhappy
glance toward his visitor. By his side stood a black of small stature,
in whose rude face, as occasionally, like a shepherd’s dog, he mutely
turned it up into the Spaniard’s, sorrow and affection were equally
blended.

Struggling through the throng, the American advanced to the Spaniard,
assuring him of his sympathies, and offering to render whatever
assistance might be in his power. To which the Spaniard returned for
the present but grave and ceremonious acknowledgments, his national
formality dusked by the saturnine mood of ill-health.

But losing no time in mere compliments, Captain Delano, returning to
the gangway, had his basket of fish brought up; and as the wind still
continued light, so that some hours at least must elapse ere the ship
could be brought to the anchorage, he bade his men return to the
sealer, and fetch back as much water as the whale-boat could carry,
with whatever soft bread the steward might have, all the remaining
pumpkins on board, with a box of sugar, and a dozen of his private
bottles of cider.

Not many minutes after the boat’s pushing off, to the vexation of all,
the wind entirely died away, and the tide turning, began drifting back
the ship helplessly seaward. But trusting this would not long last,
Captain Delano sought, with good hopes, to cheer up the strangers,
feeling no small satisfaction that, with persons in their condition, he
could—thanks to his frequent voyages along the Spanish main—converse
with some freedom in their native tongue.

While left alone with them, he was not long in observing some things
tending to heighten his first impressions; but surprise was lost in
pity, both for the Spaniards and blacks, alike evidently reduced from
scarcity of water and provisions; while long-continued suffering seemed
to have brought out the less good-natured qualities of the negroes,
besides, at the same time, impairing the Spaniard’s authority over
them. But, under the circumstances, precisely this condition of things
was to have been anticipated. In armies, navies, cities, or families,
in nature herself, nothing more relaxes good order than misery. Still,
Captain Delano was not without the idea, that had Benito Cereno been a
man of greater energy, misrule would hardly have come to the present
pass. But the debility, constitutional or induced by hardships, bodily
and mental, of the Spanish captain, was too obvious to be overlooked. A
prey to settled dejection, as if long mocked with hope he would not now
indulge it, even when it had ceased to be a mock, the prospect of that
day, or evening at furthest, lying at anchor, with plenty of water for
his people, and a brother captain to counsel and befriend, seemed in no
perceptible degree to encourage him. His mind appeared unstrung, if not
still more seriously affected. Shut up in these oaken walls, chained to
one dull round of command, whose unconditionality cloyed him, like some
hypochondriac abbot he moved slowly about, at times suddenly pausing,
starting, or staring, biting his lip, biting his finger-nail, flushing,
paling, twitching his beard, with other symptoms of an absent or moody
mind. This distempered spirit was lodged, as before hinted, in as
distempered a frame. He was rather tall, but seemed never to have been
robust, and now with nervous suffering was almost worn to a skeleton. A
tendency to some pulmonary complaint appeared to have been lately
confirmed. His voice was like that of one with lungs half gone—hoarsely
suppressed, a husky whisper. No wonder that, as in this state he
tottered about, his private servant apprehensively followed him.
Sometimes the negro gave his master his arm, or took his handkerchief
out of his pocket for him; performing these and similar offices with
that affectionate zeal which transmutes into something filial or
fraternal acts in themselves but menial; and which has gained for the
negro the repute of making the most pleasing body-servant in the world;
one, too, whom a master need be on no stiffly superior terms with, but
may treat with familiar trust; less a servant than a devoted companion.

Marking the noisy indocility of the blacks in general, as well as what
seemed the sullen inefficiency of the whites it was not without humane
satisfaction that Captain Delano witnessed the steady good conduct of
Babo.

But the good conduct of Babo, hardly more than the ill-behavior of
others, seemed to withdraw the half-lunatic Don Benito from his cloudy
languor. Not that such precisely was the impression made by the
Spaniard on the mind of his visitor. The Spaniard’s individual unrest
was, for the present, but noted as a conspicuous feature in the ship’s
general affliction. Still, Captain Delano was not a little concerned at
what he could not help taking for the time to be Don Benito’s
unfriendly indifference towards himself. The Spaniard’s manner, too,
conveyed a sort of sour and gloomy disdain, which he seemed at no pains
to disguise. But this the American in charity ascribed to the harassing
effects of sickness, since, in former instances, he had noted that
there are peculiar natures on whom prolonged physical suffering seems
to cancel every social instinct of kindness; as if, forced to black
bread themselves, they deemed it but equity that each person coming
nigh them should, indirectly, by some slight or affront, be made to
partake of their fare.

But ere long Captain Delano bethought him that, indulgent as he was at
the first, in judging the Spaniard, he might not, after all, have
exercised charity enough. At bottom it was Don Benito’s reserve which
displeased him; but the same reserve was shown towards all but his
faithful personal attendant. Even the formal reports which, according
to sea-usage, were, at stated times, made to him by some petty
underling, either a white, mulatto or black, he hardly had patience
enough to listen to, without betraying contemptuous aversion. His
manner upon such occasions was, in its degree, not unlike that which
might be supposed to have been his imperial countryman’s, Charles V.,
just previous to the anchoritish retirement of that monarch from the
throne.

This splenetic disrelish of his place was evinced in almost every
function pertaining to it. Proud as he was moody, he condescended to no
personal mandate. Whatever special orders were necessary, their
delivery was delegated to his body-servant, who in turn transferred
them to their ultimate destination, through runners, alert Spanish boys
or slave boys, like pages or pilot-fish within easy call continually
hovering round Don Benito. So that to have beheld this undemonstrative
invalid gliding about, apathetic and mute, no landsman could have
dreamed that in him was lodged a dictatorship beyond which, while at
sea, there was no earthly appeal.

Thus, the Spaniard, regarded in his reserve, seemed the involuntary
victim of mental disorder. But, in fact, his reserve might, in some
degree, have proceeded from design. If so, then here was evinced the
unhealthy climax of that icy though conscientious policy, more or less
adopted by all commanders of large ships, which, except in signal
emergencies, obliterates alike the manifestation of sway with every
trace of sociality; transforming the man into a block, or rather into a
loaded cannon, which, until there is call for thunder, has nothing to
say.

Viewing him in this light, it seemed but a natural token of the
perverse habit induced by a long course of such hard self-restraint,
that, notwithstanding the present condition of his ship, the Spaniard
should still persist in a demeanor, which, however harmless, or, it may
be, appropriate, in a well-appointed vessel, such as the San Dominick
might have been at the outset of the voyage, was anything but judicious
now. But the Spaniard, perhaps, thought that it was with captains as
with gods: reserve, under all events, must still be their cue. But
probably this appearance of slumbering dominion might have been but an
attempted disguise to conscious imbecility—not deep policy, but shallow
device. But be all this as it might, whether Don Benito’s manner was
designed or not, the more Captain Delano noted its pervading reserve,
the less he felt uneasiness at any particular manifestation of that
reserve towards himself.

Neither were his thoughts taken up by the captain alone. Wonted to the
quiet orderliness of the sealer’s comfortable family of a crew, the
noisy confusion of the San Dominick’s suffering host repeatedly
challenged his eye. Some prominent breaches, not only of discipline but
of decency, were observed. These Captain Delano could not but ascribe,
in the main, to the absence of those subordinate deck-officers to whom,
along with higher duties, is intrusted what may be styled the police
department of a populous ship. True, the old oakum-pickers appeared at
times to act the part of monitorial constables to their countrymen, the
blacks; but though occasionally succeeding in allaying trifling
outbreaks now and then between man and man, they could do little or
nothing toward establishing general quiet. The San Dominick was in the
condition of a transatlantic emigrant ship, among whose multitude of
living freight are some individuals, doubtless, as little troublesome
as crates and bales; but the friendly remonstrances of such with their
ruder companions are of not so much avail as the unfriendly arm of the
mate. What the San Dominick wanted was, what the emigrant ship has,
stern superior officers. But on these decks not so much as a
fourth-mate was to be seen.

The visitor’s curiosity was roused to learn the particulars of those
mishaps which had brought about such absenteeism, with its
consequences; because, though deriving some inkling of the voyage from
the wails which at the first moment had greeted him, yet of the details
no clear understanding had been had. The best account would, doubtless,
be given by the captain. Yet at first the visitor was loth to ask it,
unwilling to provoke some distant rebuff. But plucking up courage, he
at last accosted Don Benito, renewing the expression of his benevolent
interest, adding, that did he (Captain Delano) but know the particulars
of the ship’s misfortunes, he would, perhaps, be better able in the end
to relieve them. Would Don Benito favor him with the whole story.

Don Benito faltered; then, like some somnambulist suddenly interfered
with, vacantly stared at his visitor, and ended by looking down on the
deck. He maintained this posture so long, that Captain Delano, almost
equally disconcerted, and involuntarily almost as rude, turned suddenly
from him, walking forward to accost one of the Spanish seamen for the
desired information. But he had hardly gone five paces, when, with a
sort of eagerness, Don Benito invited him back, regretting his
momentary absence of mind, and professing readiness to gratify him.

While most part of the story was being given, the two captains stood on
the after part of the main-deck, a privileged spot, no one being near
but the servant.

“It is now a hundred and ninety days,” began the Spaniard, in his husky
whisper, “that this ship, well officered and well manned, with several
cabin passengers—some fifty Spaniards in all—sailed from Buenos Ayres
bound to Lima, with a general cargo, hardware, Paraguay tea and the
like—and,” pointing forward, “that parcel of negroes, now not more than
a hundred and fifty, as you see, but then numbering over three hundred
souls. Off Cape Horn we had heavy gales. In one moment, by night, three
of my best officers, with fifteen sailors, were lost, with the
main-yard; the spar snapping under them in the slings, as they sought,
with heavers, to beat down the icy sail. To lighten the hull, the
heavier sacks of mata were thrown into the sea, with most of the
water-pipes lashed on deck at the time. And this last necessity it was,
combined with the prolonged detections afterwards experienced, which
eventually brought about our chief causes of suffering. When—”

Here there was a sudden fainting attack of his cough, brought on, no
doubt, by his mental distress. His servant sustained him, and drawing a
cordial from his pocket placed it to his lips. He a little revived. But
unwilling to leave him unsupported while yet imperfectly restored, the
black with one arm still encircled his master, at the same time keeping
his eye fixed on his face, as if to watch for the first sign of
complete restoration, or relapse, as the event might prove.

The Spaniard proceeded, but brokenly and obscurely, as one in a dream.

—“Oh, my God! rather than pass through what I have, with joy I would
have hailed the most terrible gales; but—”

His cough returned and with increased violence; this subsiding; with
reddened lips and closed eyes he fell heavily against his supporter.

“His mind wanders. He was thinking of the plague that followed the
gales,” plaintively sighed the servant; “my poor, poor master!”
wringing one hand, and with the other wiping the mouth. “But be
patient, Señor,” again turning to Captain Delano, “these fits do not
last long; master will soon be himself.”

Don Benito reviving, went on; but as this portion of the story was very
brokenly delivered, the substance only will here be set down.

It appeared that after the ship had been many days tossed in storms off
the Cape, the scurvy broke out, carrying off numbers of the whites and
blacks. When at last they had worked round into the Pacific, their
spars and sails were so damaged, and so inadequately handled by the
surviving mariners, most of whom were become invalids, that, unable to
lay her northerly course by the wind, which was powerful, the
unmanageable ship, for successive days and nights, was blown
northwestward, where the breeze suddenly deserted her, in unknown
waters, to sultry calms. The absence of the water-pipes now proved as
fatal to life as before their presence had menaced it. Induced, or at
least aggravated, by the more than scanty allowance of water, a
malignant fever followed the scurvy; with the excessive heat of the
lengthened calm, making such short work of it as to sweep away, as by
billows, whole families of the Africans, and a yet larger number,
proportionably, of the Spaniards, including, by a luckless fatality,
every remaining officer on board. Consequently, in the smart west winds
eventually following the calm, the already rent sails, having to be
simply dropped, not furled, at need, had been gradually reduced to the
beggars’ rags they were now. To procure substitutes for his lost
sailors, as well as supplies of water and sails, the captain, at the
earliest opportunity, had made for Baldivia, the southernmost civilized
port of Chili and South America; but upon nearing the coast the thick
weather had prevented him from so much as sighting that harbor. Since
which period, almost without a crew, and almost without canvas and
almost without water, and, at intervals giving its added dead to the
sea, the San Dominick had been battle-dored about by contrary winds,
inveigled by currents, or grown weedy in calms. Like a man lost in
woods, more than once she had doubled upon her own track.

“But throughout these calamities,” huskily continued Don Benito,
painfully turning in the half embrace of his servant, “I have to thank
those negroes you see, who, though to your inexperienced eyes appearing
unruly, have, indeed, conducted themselves with less of restlessness
than even their owner could have thought possible under such
circumstances.”

Here he again fell faintly back. Again his mind wandered; but he
rallied, and less obscurely proceeded.

“Yes, their owner was quite right in assuring me that no fetters would
be needed with his blacks; so that while, as is wont in this
transportation, those negroes have always remained upon deck—not thrust
below, as in the Guinea-men—they have, also, from the beginning, been
freely permitted to range within given bounds at their pleasure.”

Once more the faintness returned—his mind roved—but, recovering, he
resumed:

“But it is Babo here to whom, under God, I owe not only my own
preservation, but likewise to him, chiefly, the merit is due, of
pacifying his more ignorant brethren, when at intervals tempted to
murmurings.”

“Ah, master,” sighed the black, bowing his face, “don’t speak of me;
Babo is nothing; what Babo has done was but duty.”

“Faithful fellow!” cried Captain Delano. “Don Benito, I envy you such a
friend; slave I cannot call him.”

As master and man stood before him, the black upholding the white,
Captain Delano could not but bethink him of the beauty of that
relationship which could present such a spectacle of fidelity on the
one hand and confidence on the other. The scene was heightened by, the
contrast in dress, denoting their relative positions. The Spaniard wore
a loose Chili jacket of dark velvet; white small-clothes and stockings,
with silver buckles at the knee and instep; a high-crowned sombrero, of
fine grass; a slender sword, silver mounted, hung from a knot in his
sash—the last being an almost invariable adjunct, more for utility than
ornament, of a South American gentleman’s dress to this hour. Excepting
when his occasional nervous contortions brought about disarray, there
was a certain precision in his attire curiously at variance with the
unsightly disorder around; especially in the belittered Ghetto, forward
of the main-mast, wholly occupied by the blacks.

The servant wore nothing but wide trowsers, apparently, from their
coarseness and patches, made out of some old topsail; they were clean,
and confined at the waist by a bit of unstranded rope, which, with his
composed, deprecatory air at times, made him look something like a
begging friar of St. Francis.

However unsuitable for the time and place, at least in the
blunt-thinking American’s eyes, and however strangely surviving in the
midst of all his afflictions, the toilette of Don Benito might not, in
fashion at least, have gone beyond the style of the day among South
Americans of his class. Though on the present voyage sailing from
Buenos Ayres, he had avowed himself a native and resident of Chili,
whose inhabitants had not so generally adopted the plain coat and once
plebeian pantaloons; but, with a becoming modification, adhered to
their provincial costume, picturesque as any in the world. Still,
relatively to the pale history of the voyage, and his own pale face,
there seemed something so incongruous in the Spaniard’s apparel, as
almost to suggest the image of an invalid courtier tottering about
London streets in the time of the plague.

The portion of the narrative which, perhaps, most excited interest, as
well as some surprise, considering the latitudes in question, was the
long calms spoken of, and more particularly the ship’s so long drifting
about. Without communicating the opinion, of course, the American could
not but impute at least part of the detentions both to clumsy
seamanship and faulty navigation. Eying Don Benito’s small, yellow
hands, he easily inferred that the young captain had not got into
command at the hawse-hole, but the cabin-window; and if so, why wonder
at incompetence, in youth, sickness, and gentility united?

But drowning criticism in compassion, after a fresh repetition of his
sympathies, Captain Delano, having heard out his story, not only
engaged, as in the first place, to see Don Benito and his people
supplied in their immediate bodily needs, but, also, now farther
promised to assist him in procuring a large permanent supply of water,
as well as some sails and rigging; and, though it would involve no
small embarrassment to himself, yet he would spare three of his best
seamen for temporary deck officers; so that without delay the ship
might proceed to Conception, there fully to refit for Lima, her
destined port.

Such generosity was not without its effect, even upon the invalid. His
face lighted up; eager and hectic, he met the honest glance of his
visitor. With gratitude he seemed overcome.

“This excitement is bad for master,” whispered the servant, taking his
arm, and with soothing words gently drawing him aside.

When Don Benito returned, the American was pained to observe that his
hopefulness, like the sudden kindling in his cheek, was but febrile and
transient.

Ere long, with a joyless mien, looking up towards the poop, the host
invited his guest to accompany him there, for the benefit of what
little breath of wind might be stirring.

As, during the telling of the story, Captain Delano had once or twice
started at the occasional cymballing of the hatchet-polishers,
wondering why such an interruption should be allowed, especially in
that part of the ship, and in the ears of an invalid; and moreover, as
the hatchets had anything but an attractive look, and the handlers of
them still less so, it was, therefore, to tell the truth, not without
some lurking reluctance, or even shrinking, it may be, that Captain
Delano, with apparent complaisance, acquiesced in his host’s
invitation. The more so, since, with an untimely caprice of punctilio,
rendered distressing by his cadaverous aspect, Don Benito, with
Castilian bows, solemnly insisted upon his guest’s preceding him up the
ladder leading to the elevation; where, one on each side of the last
step, sat for armorial supporters and sentries two of the ominous file.
Gingerly enough stepped good Captain Delano between them, and in the
instant of leaving them behind, like one running the gauntlet, he felt
an apprehensive twitch in the calves of his legs.

But when, facing about, he saw the whole file, like so many
organ-grinders, still stupidly intent on their work, unmindful of
everything beside, he could not but smile at his late fidgety panic.

Presently, while standing with his host, looking forward upon the decks
below, he was struck by one of those instances of insubordination
previously alluded to. Three black boys, with two Spanish boys, were
sitting together on the hatches, scraping a rude wooden platter, in
which some scanty mess had recently been cooked. Suddenly, one of the
black boys, enraged at a word dropped by one of his white companions,
seized a knife, and, though called to forbear by one of the
oakum-pickers, struck the lad over the head, inflicting a gash from
which blood flowed.

In amazement, Captain Delano inquired what this meant. To which the
pale Don Benito dully muttered, that it was merely the sport of the
lad.

“Pretty serious sport, truly,” rejoined Captain Delano. “Had such a
thing happened on board the Bachelor’s Delight, instant punishment
would have followed.”

At these words the Spaniard turned upon the American one of his sudden,
staring, half-lunatic looks; then, relapsing into his torpor, answered,
“Doubtless, doubtless, Señor.”

Is it, thought Captain Delano, that this hapless man is one of those
paper captains I’ve known, who by policy wink at what by power they
cannot put down? I know no sadder sight than a commander who has little
of command but the name.

“I should think, Don Benito,” he now said, glancing towards the
oakum-picker who had sought to interfere with the boys, “that you would
find it advantageous to keep all your blacks employed, especially the
younger ones, no matter at what useless task, and no matter what
happens to the ship. Why, even with my little band, I find such a
course indispensable. I once kept a crew on my quarter-deck thrumming
mats for my cabin, when, for three days, I had given up my ship—mats,
men, and all—for a speedy loss, owing to the violence of a gale, in
which we could do nothing but helplessly drive before it.”

“Doubtless, doubtless,” muttered Don Benito.

“But,” continued Captain Delano, again glancing upon the oakum-pickers
and then at the hatchet-polishers, near by, “I see you keep some, at
least, of your host employed.”

“Yes,” was again the vacant response.

“Those old men there, shaking their pows from their pulpits,” continued
Captain Delano, pointing to the oakum-pickers, “seem to act the part of
old dominies to the rest, little heeded as their admonitions are at
times. Is this voluntary on their part, Don Benito, or have you
appointed them shepherds to your flock of black sheep?”

“What posts they fill, I appointed them,” rejoined the Spaniard, in an
acrid tone, as if resenting some supposed satiric reflection.

“And these others, these Ashantee conjurors here,” continued Captain
Delano, rather uneasily eying the brandished steel of the
hatchet-polishers, where, in spots, it had been brought to a shine,
“this seems a curious business they are at, Don Benito?”

“In the gales we met,” answered the Spaniard, “what of our general
cargo was not thrown overboard was much damaged by the brine. Since
coming into calm weather, I have had several cases of knives and
hatchets daily brought up for overhauling and cleaning.”

“A prudent idea, Don Benito. You are part owner of ship and cargo, I
presume; but none of the slaves, perhaps?”

“I am owner of all you see,” impatiently returned Don Benito, “except
the main company of blacks, who belonged to my late friend, Alexandro
Aranda.”

As he mentioned this name, his air was heart-broken; his knees shook;
his servant supported him.

Thinking he divined the cause of such unusual emotion, to confirm his
surmise, Captain Delano, after a pause, said: “And may I ask, Don
Benito, whether—since awhile ago you spoke of some cabin passengers—the
friend, whose loss so afflicts you, at the outset of the voyage
accompanied his blacks?”

“Yes.”

“But died of the fever?”

“Died of the fever. Oh, could I but—”

Again quivering, the Spaniard paused.

“Pardon me,” said Captain Delano, lowly, “but I think that, by a
sympathetic experience, I conjecture, Don Benito, what it is that gives
the keener edge to your grief. It was once my hard fortune to lose, at
sea, a dear friend, my own brother, then supercargo. Assured of the
welfare of his spirit, its departure I could have borne like a man; but
that honest eye, that honest hand—both of which had so often met
mine—and that warm heart; all, all—like scraps to the dogs—to throw all
to the sharks! It was then I vowed never to have for fellow-voyager a
man I loved, unless, unbeknown to him, I had provided every requisite,
in case of a fatality, for embalming his mortal part for interment on
shore. Were your friend’s remains now on board this ship, Don Benito,
not thus strangely would the mention of his name affect you.”

“On board this ship?” echoed the Spaniard. Then, with horrified
gestures, as directed against some spectre, he unconsciously fell into
the ready arms of his attendant, who, with a silent appeal toward
Captain Delano, seemed beseeching him not again to broach a theme so
unspeakably distressing to his master.

This poor fellow now, thought the pained American, is the victim of
that sad superstition which associates goblins with the deserted body
of man, as ghosts with an abandoned house. How unlike are we made! What
to me, in like case, would have been a solemn satisfaction, the bare
suggestion, even, terrifies the Spaniard into this trance. Poor
Alexandro Aranda! what would you say could you here see your
friend—who, on former voyages, when you, for months, were left behind,
has, I dare say, often longed, and longed, for one peep at you—now
transported with terror at the least thought of having you anyway nigh
him.

At this moment, with a dreary grave-yard toll, betokening a flaw, the
ship’s forecastle bell, smote by one of the grizzled oakum-pickers,
proclaimed ten o’clock, through the leaden calm; when Captain Delano’s
attention was caught by the moving figure of a gigantic black, emerging
from the general crowd below, and slowly advancing towards the elevated
poop. An iron collar was about his neck, from which depended a chain,
thrice wound round his body; the terminating links padlocked together
at a broad band of iron, his girdle.

“How like a mute Atufal moves,” murmured the servant.

The black mounted the steps of the poop, and, like a brave prisoner,
brought up to receive sentence, stood in unquailing muteness before Don
Benito, now recovered from his attack.

At the first glimpse of his approach, Don Benito had started, a
resentful shadow swept over his face; and, as with the sudden memory of
bootless rage, his white lips glued together.

This is some mulish mutineer, thought Captain Delano, surveying, not
without a mixture of admiration, the colossal form of the negro.

“See, he waits your question, master,” said the servant.

Thus reminded, Don Benito, nervously averting his glance, as if
shunning, by anticipation, some rebellious response, in a disconcerted
voice, thus spoke:—

“Atufal, will you ask my pardon, now?”

The black was silent.

“Again, master,” murmured the servant, with bitter upbraiding eyeing
his countryman, “Again, master; he will bend to master yet.”

“Answer,” said Don Benito, still averting his glance, “say but the one
word, _pardon_, and your chains shall be off.”

Upon this, the black, slowly raising both arms, let them lifelessly
fall, his links clanking, his head bowed; as much as to say, “no, I am
content.”

“Go,” said Don Benito, with inkept and unknown emotion.

Deliberately as he had come, the black obeyed.

“Excuse me, Don Benito,” said Captain Delano, “but this scene surprises
me; what means it, pray?”

“It means that that negro alone, of all the band, has given me peculiar
cause of offense. I have put him in chains; I—”

Here he paused; his hand to his head, as if there were a swimming
there, or a sudden bewilderment of memory had come over him; but
meeting his servant’s kindly glance seemed reassured, and proceeded:—

“I could not scourge such a form. But I told him he must ask my pardon.
As yet he has not. At my command, every two hours he stands before me.”

“And how long has this been?”

“Some sixty days.”

“And obedient in all else? And respectful?”

“Yes.”

“Upon my conscience, then,” exclaimed Captain Delano, impulsively, “he
has a royal spirit in him, this fellow.”

“He may have some right to it,” bitterly returned Don Benito, “he says
he was king in his own land.”

“Yes,” said the servant, entering a word, “those slits in Atufal’s ears
once held wedges of gold; but poor Babo here, in his own land, was only
a poor slave; a black man’s slave was Babo, who now is the white’s.”

Somewhat annoyed by these conversational familiarities, Captain Delano
turned curiously upon the attendant, then glanced inquiringly at his
master; but, as if long wonted to these little informalities, neither
master nor man seemed to understand him.

“What, pray, was Atufal’s offense, Don Benito?” asked Captain Delano;
“if it was not something very serious, take a fool’s advice, and, in
view of his general docility, as well as in some natural respect for
his spirit, remit him his penalty.”

“No, no, master never will do that,” here murmured the servant to
himself, “proud Atufal must first ask master’s pardon. The slave there
carries the padlock, but master here carries the key.”

His attention thus directed, Captain Delano now noticed for the first,
that, suspended by a slender silken cord, from Don Benito’s neck, hung
a key. At once, from the servant’s muttered syllables, divining the
key’s purpose, he smiled, and said:—“So, Don Benito—padlock and
key—significant symbols, truly.”

Biting his lip, Don Benito faltered.

Though the remark of Captain Delano, a man of such native simplicity as
to be incapable of satire or irony, had been dropped in playful
allusion to the Spaniard’s singularly evidenced lordship over the
black; yet the hypochondriac seemed some way to have taken it as a
malicious reflection upon his confessed inability thus far to break
down, at least, on a verbal summons, the entrenched will of the slave.
Deploring this supposed misconception, yet despairing of correcting it,
Captain Delano shifted the subject; but finding his companion more than
ever withdrawn, as if still sourly digesting the lees of the presumed
affront above-mentioned, by-and-by Captain Delano likewise became less
talkative, oppressed, against his own will, by what seemed the secret
vindictiveness of the morbidly sensitive Spaniard. But the good sailor,
himself of a quite contrary disposition, refrained, on his part, alike
from the appearance as from the feeling of resentment, and if silent,
was only so from contagion.

Presently the Spaniard, assisted by his servant somewhat discourteously
crossed over from his guest; a procedure which, sensibly enough, might
have been allowed to pass for idle caprice of ill-humor, had not master
and man, lingering round the corner of the elevated skylight, began
whispering together in low voices. This was unpleasing. And more; the
moody air of the Spaniard, which at times had not been without a sort
of valetudinarian stateliness, now seemed anything but dignified; while
the menial familiarity of the servant lost its original charm of
simple-hearted attachment.

In his embarrassment, the visitor turned his face to the other side of
the ship. By so doing, his glance accidentally fell on a young Spanish
sailor, a coil of rope in his hand, just stepped from the deck to the
first round of the mizzen-rigging. Perhaps the man would not have been
particularly noticed, were it not that, during his ascent to one of the
yards, he, with a sort of covert intentness, kept his eye fixed on
Captain Delano, from whom, presently, it passed, as if by a natural
sequence, to the two whisperers.

His own attention thus redirected to that quarter, Captain Delano gave
a slight start. From something in Don Benito’s manner just then, it
seemed as if the visitor had, at least partly, been the subject of the
withdrawn consultation going on—a conjecture as little agreeable to the
guest as it was little flattering to the host.

The singular alternations of courtesy and ill-breeding in the Spanish
captain were unaccountable, except on one of two suppositions—innocent
lunacy, or wicked imposture.

But the first idea, though it might naturally have occurred to an
indifferent observer, and, in some respect, had not hitherto been
wholly a stranger to Captain Delano’s mind, yet, now that, in an
incipient way, he began to regard the stranger’s conduct something in
the light of an intentional affront, of course the idea of lunacy was
virtually vacated. But if not a lunatic, what then? Under the
circumstances, would a gentleman, nay, any honest boor, act the part
now acted by his host? The man was an impostor. Some low-born
adventurer, masquerading as an oceanic grandee; yet so ignorant of the
first requisites of mere gentlemanhood as to be betrayed into the
present remarkable indecorum. That strange ceremoniousness, too, at
other times evinced, seemed not uncharacteristic of one playing a part
above his real level. Benito Cereno—Don Benito Cereno—a sounding name.
One, too, at that period, not unknown, in the surname, to super-cargoes
and sea captains trading along the Spanish Main, as belonging to one of
the most enterprising and extensive mercantile families in all those
provinces; several members of it having titles; a sort of Castilian
Rothschild, with a noble brother, or cousin, in every great trading
town of South America. The alleged Don Benito was in early manhood,
about twenty-nine or thirty. To assume a sort of roving cadetship in
the maritime affairs of such a house, what more likely scheme for a
young knave of talent and spirit? But the Spaniard was a pale invalid.
Never mind. For even to the degree of simulating mortal disease, the
craft of some tricksters had been known to attain. To think that, under
the aspect of infantile weakness, the most savage energies might be
couched—those velvets of the Spaniard but the silky paw to his fangs.

From no train of thought did these fancies come; not from within, but
from without; suddenly, too, and in one throng, like hoar frost; yet as
soon to vanish as the mild sun of Captain Delano’s good-nature regained
its meridian.

Glancing over once more towards his host—whose side-face, revealed
above the skylight, was now turned towards him—he was struck by the
profile, whose clearness of cut was refined by the thinness, incident
to ill-health, as well as ennobled about the chin by the beard. Away
with suspicion. He was a true off-shoot of a true hidalgo Cereno.

Relieved by these and other better thoughts, the visitor, lightly
humming a tune, now began indifferently pacing the poop, so as not to
betray to Don Benito that he had at all mistrusted incivility, much
less duplicity; for such mistrust would yet be proved illusory, and by
the event; though, for the present, the circumstance which had provoked
that distrust remained unexplained. But when that little mystery should
have been cleared up, Captain Delano thought he might extremely regret
it, did he allow Don Benito to become aware that he had indulged in
ungenerous surmises. In short, to the Spaniard’s black-letter text, it
was best, for awhile, to leave open margin.

Presently, his pale face twitching and overcast, the Spaniard, still
supported by his attendant, moved over towards his guest, when, with
even more than his usual embarrassment, and a strange sort of
intriguing intonation in his husky whisper, the following conversation
began:—

“Señor, may I ask how long you have lain at this isle?”

“Oh, but a day or two, Don Benito.”

“And from what port are you last?”

“Canton.”

“And there, Señor, you exchanged your sealskins for teas and silks, I
think you said?”

“Yes, Silks, mostly.”

“And the balance you took in specie, perhaps?”

Captain Delano, fidgeting a little, answered—

“Yes; some silver; not a very great deal, though.”

“Ah—well. May I ask how many men have you, Señor?”

Captain Delano slightly started, but answered—

“About five-and-twenty, all told.”

“And at present, Señor, all on board, I suppose?”

“All on board, Don Benito,” replied the Captain, now with satisfaction.

“And will be to-night, Señor?”

At this last question, following so many pertinacious ones, for the
soul of him Captain Delano could not but look very earnestly at the
questioner, who, instead of meeting the glance, with every token of
craven discomposure dropped his eyes to the deck; presenting an
unworthy contrast to his servant, who, just then, was kneeling at his
feet, adjusting a loose shoe-buckle; his disengaged face meantime, with
humble curiosity, turned openly up into his master’s downcast one.

The Spaniard, still with a guilty shuffle, repeated his question:

“And—and will be to-night, Señor?”

“Yes, for aught I know,” returned Captain Delano—“but nay,” rallying
himself into fearless truth, “some of them talked of going off on
another fishing party about midnight.”

“Your ships generally go—go more or less armed, I believe, Señor?”

“Oh, a six-pounder or two, in case of emergency,” was the intrepidly
indifferent reply, “with a small stock of muskets, sealing-spears, and
cutlasses, you know.”

As he thus responded, Captain Delano again glanced at Don Benito, but
the latter’s eyes were averted; while abruptly and awkwardly shifting
the subject, he made some peevish allusion to the calm, and then,
without apology, once more, with his attendant, withdrew to the
opposite bulwarks, where the whispering was resumed.

At this moment, and ere Captain Delano could cast a cool thought upon
what had just passed, the young Spanish sailor, before mentioned, was
seen descending from the rigging. In act of stooping over to spring
inboard to the deck, his voluminous, unconfined frock, or shirt, of
coarse woolen, much spotted with tar, opened out far down the chest,
revealing a soiled under garment of what seemed the finest linen,
edged, about the neck, with a narrow blue ribbon, sadly faded and worn.
At this moment the young sailor’s eye was again fixed on the
whisperers, and Captain Delano thought he observed a lurking
significance in it, as if silent signs, of some Freemason sort, had
that instant been interchanged.

This once more impelled his own glance in the direction of Don Benito,
and, as before, he could not but infer that himself formed the subject
of the conference. He paused. The sound of the hatchet-polishing fell
on his ears. He cast another swift side-look at the two. They had the
air of conspirators. In connection with the late questionings, and the
incident of the young sailor, these things now begat such return of
involuntary suspicion, that the singular guilelessness of the American
could not endure it. Plucking up a gay and humorous expression, he
crossed over to the two rapidly, saying:—“Ha, Don Benito, your black
here seems high in your trust; a sort of privy-counselor, in fact.”

Upon this, the servant looked up with a good-natured grin, but the
master started as from a venomous bite. It was a moment or two before
the Spaniard sufficiently recovered himself to reply; which he did, at
last, with cold constraint:—“Yes, Señor, I have trust in Babo.”

Here Babo, changing his previous grin of mere animal humor into an
intelligent smile, not ungratefully eyed his master.

Finding that the Spaniard now stood silent and reserved, as if
involuntarily, or purposely giving hint that his guest’s proximity was
inconvenient just then, Captain Delano, unwilling to appear uncivil
even to incivility itself, made some trivial remark and moved off;
again and again turning over in his mind the mysterious demeanor of Don
Benito Cereno.

He had descended from the poop, and, wrapped in thought, was passing
near a dark hatchway, leading down into the steerage, when, perceiving
motion there, he looked to see what moved. The same instant there was a
sparkle in the shadowy hatchway, and he saw one of the Spanish sailors,
prowling there hurriedly placing his hand in the bosom of his frock, as
if hiding something. Before the man could have been certain who it was
that was passing, he slunk below out of sight. But enough was seen of
him to make it sure that he was the same young sailor before noticed in
the rigging.

What was that which so sparkled? thought Captain Delano. It was no
lamp—no match—no live coal. Could it have been a jewel? But how come
sailors with jewels?—or with silk-trimmed under-shirts either? Has he
been robbing the trunks of the dead cabin-passengers? But if so, he
would hardly wear one of the stolen articles on board ship here. Ah,
ah—if, now, that was, indeed, a secret sign I saw passing between this
suspicious fellow and his captain awhile since; if I could only be
certain that, in my uneasiness, my senses did not deceive me, then—

Here, passing from one suspicious thing to another, his mind revolved
the strange questions put to him concerning his ship.

By a curious coincidence, as each point was recalled, the black wizards
of Ashantee would strike up with their hatchets, as in ominous comment
on the white stranger’s thoughts. Pressed by such enigmas and portents,
it would have been almost against nature, had not, even into the least
distrustful heart, some ugly misgivings obtruded.

Observing the ship, now helplessly fallen into a current, with
enchanted sails, drifting with increased rapidity seaward; and noting
that, from a lately intercepted projection of the land, the sealer was
hidden, the stout mariner began to quake at thoughts which he barely
durst confess to himself. Above all, he began to feel a ghostly dread
of Don Benito. And yet, when he roused himself, dilated his chest, felt
himself strong on his legs, and coolly considered it—what did all these
phantoms amount to?

Had the Spaniard any sinister scheme, it must have reference not so
much to him (Captain Delano) as to his ship (the Bachelor’s Delight).
Hence the present drifting away of the one ship from the other, instead
of favoring any such possible scheme, was, for the time, at least,
opposed to it. Clearly any suspicion, combining such contradictions,
must need be delusive. Beside, was it not absurd to think of a vessel
in distress—a vessel by sickness almost dismanned of her crew—a vessel
whose inmates were parched for water—was it not a thousand times absurd
that such a craft should, at present, be of a piratical character; or
her commander, either for himself or those under him, cherish any
desire but for speedy relief and refreshment? But then, might not
general distress, and thirst in particular, be affected? And might not
that same undiminished Spanish crew, alleged to have perished off to a
remnant, be at that very moment lurking in the hold? On heart-broken
pretense of entreating a cup of cold water, fiends in human form had
got into lonely dwellings, nor retired until a dark deed had been done.
And among the Malay pirates, it was no unusual thing to lure ships
after them into their treacherous harbors, or entice boarders from a
declared enemy at sea, by the spectacle of thinly manned or vacant
decks, beneath which prowled a hundred spears with yellow arms ready to
upthrust them through the mats. Not that Captain Delano had entirely
credited such things. He had heard of them—and now, as stories, they
recurred. The present destination of the ship was the anchorage. There
she would be near his own vessel. Upon gaining that vicinity, might not
the San Dominick, like a slumbering volcano, suddenly let loose
energies now hid?

He recalled the Spaniard’s manner while telling his story. There was a
gloomy hesitancy and subterfuge about it. It was just the manner of one
making up his tale for evil purposes, as he goes. But if that story was
not true, what was the truth? That the ship had unlawfully come into
the Spaniard’s possession? But in many of its details, especially in
reference to the more calamitous parts, such as the fatalities among
the seamen, the consequent prolonged beating about, the past sufferings
from obstinate calms, and still continued suffering from thirst; in all
these points, as well as others, Don Benito’s story had corroborated
not only the wailing ejaculations of the indiscriminate multitude,
white and black, but likewise—what seemed impossible to be
counterfeit—by the very expression and play of every human feature,
which Captain Delano saw. If Don Benito’s story was, throughout, an
invention, then every soul on board, down to the youngest negress, was
his carefully drilled recruit in the plot: an incredible inference. And
yet, if there was ground for mistrusting his veracity, that inference
was a legitimate one.

But those questions of the Spaniard. There, indeed, one might pause.
Did they not seem put with much the same object with which the burglar
or assassin, by day-time, reconnoitres the walls of a house? But, with
ill purposes, to solicit such information openly of the chief person
endangered, and so, in effect, setting him on his guard; how unlikely a
procedure was that? Absurd, then, to suppose that those questions had
been prompted by evil designs. Thus, the same conduct, which, in this
instance, had raised the alarm, served to dispel it. In short, scarce
any suspicion or uneasiness, however apparently reasonable at the time,
which was not now, with equal apparent reason, dismissed.

At last he began to laugh at his former forebodings; and laugh at the
strange ship for, in its aspect, someway siding with them, as it were;
and laugh, too, at the odd-looking blacks, particularly those old
scissors-grinders, the Ashantees; and those bed-ridden old knitting
women, the oakum-pickers; and almost at the dark Spaniard himself, the
central hobgoblin of all.

For the rest, whatever in a serious way seemed enigmatical, was now
good-naturedly explained away by the thought that, for the most part,
the poor invalid scarcely knew what he was about; either sulking in
black vapors, or putting idle questions without sense or object.
Evidently for the present, the man was not fit to be intrusted with the
ship. On some benevolent plea withdrawing the command from him, Captain
Delano would yet have to send her to Conception, in charge of his
second mate, a worthy person and good navigator—a plan not more
convenient for the San Dominick than for Don Benito; for, relieved from
all anxiety, keeping wholly to his cabin, the sick man, under the good
nursing of his servant, would, probably, by the end of the passage, be
in a measure restored to health, and with that he should also be
restored to authority.

Such were the American’s thoughts. They were tranquilizing. There was a
difference between the idea of Don Benito’s darkly pre-ordaining
Captain Delano’s fate, and Captain Delano’s lightly arranging Don
Benito’s. Nevertheless, it was not without something of relief that the
good seaman presently perceived his whale-boat in the distance. Its
absence had been prolonged by unexpected detention at the sealer’s
side, as well as its returning trip lengthened by the continual
recession of the goal.

The advancing speck was observed by the blacks. Their shouts attracted
the attention of Don Benito, who, with a return of courtesy,
approaching Captain Delano, expressed satisfaction at the coming of
some supplies, slight and temporary as they must necessarily prove.

Captain Delano responded; but while doing so, his attention was drawn
to something passing on the deck below: among the crowd climbing the
landward bulwarks, anxiously watching the coming boat, two blacks, to
all appearances accidentally incommoded by one of the sailors,
violently pushed him aside, which the sailor someway resenting, they
dashed him to the deck, despite the earnest cries of the oakum-pickers.

“Don Benito,” said Captain Delano quickly, “do you see what is going on
there? Look!”

But, seized by his cough, the Spaniard staggered, with both hands to
his face, on the point of falling. Captain Delano would have supported
him, but the servant was more alert, who, with one hand sustaining his
master, with the other applied the cordial. Don Benito restored, the
black withdrew his support, slipping aside a little, but dutifully
remaining within call of a whisper. Such discretion was here evinced as
quite wiped away, in the visitor’s eyes, any blemish of impropriety
which might have attached to the attendant, from the indecorous
conferences before mentioned; showing, too, that if the servant were to
blame, it might be more the master’s fault than his own, since, when
left to himself, he could conduct thus well.

His glance called away from the spectacle of disorder to the more
pleasing one before him, Captain Delano could not avoid again
congratulating his host upon possessing such a servant, who, though
perhaps a little too forward now and then, must upon the whole be
invaluable to one in the invalid’s situation.

“Tell me, Don Benito,” he added, with a smile—“I should like to have
your man here, myself—what will you take for him? Would fifty doubloons
be any object?”

“Master wouldn’t part with Babo for a thousand doubloons,” murmured the
black, overhearing the offer, and taking it in earnest, and, with the
strange vanity of a faithful slave, appreciated by his master, scorning
to hear so paltry a valuation put upon him by a stranger. But Don
Benito, apparently hardly yet completely restored, and again
interrupted by his cough, made but some broken reply.

Soon his physical distress became so great, affecting his mind, too,
apparently, that, as if to screen the sad spectacle, the servant gently
conducted his master below.

Left to himself, the American, to while away the time till his boat
should arrive, would have pleasantly accosted some one of the few
Spanish seamen he saw; but recalling something that Don Benito had said
touching their ill conduct, he refrained; as a shipmaster indisposed to
countenance cowardice or unfaithfulness in seamen.

While, with these thoughts, standing with eye directed forward towards
that handful of sailors, suddenly he thought that one or two of them
returned the glance and with a sort of meaning. He rubbed his eyes, and
looked again; but again seemed to see the same thing. Under a new form,
but more obscure than any previous one, the old suspicions recurred,
but, in the absence of Don Benito, with less of panic than before.
Despite the bad account given of the sailors, Captain Delano resolved
forthwith to accost one of them. Descending the poop, he made his way
through the blacks, his movement drawing a queer cry from the
oakum-pickers, prompted by whom, the negroes, twitching each other
aside, divided before him; but, as if curious to see what was the
object of this deliberate visit to their Ghetto, closing in behind, in
tolerable order, followed the white stranger up. His progress thus
proclaimed as by mounted kings-at-arms, and escorted as by a Caffre
guard of honor, Captain Delano, assuming a good-humored, off-handed
air, continued to advance; now and then saying a blithe word to the
negroes, and his eye curiously surveying the white faces, here and
there sparsely mixed in with the blacks, like stray white pawns
venturously involved in the ranks of the chess-men opposed.

While thinking which of them to select for his purpose, he chanced to
observe a sailor seated on the deck engaged in tarring the strap of a
large block, a circle of blacks squatted round him inquisitively eying
the process.

The mean employment of the man was in contrast with something superior
in his figure. His hand, black with continually thrusting it into the
tar-pot held for him by a negro, seemed not naturally allied to his
face, a face which would have been a very fine one but for its
haggardness. Whether this haggardness had aught to do with criminality,
could not be determined; since, as intense heat and cold, though
unlike, produce like sensations, so innocence and guilt, when, through
casual association with mental pain, stamping any visible impress, use
one seal—a hacked one.

Not again that this reflection occurred to Captain Delano at the time,
charitable man as he was. Rather another idea. Because observing so
singular a haggardness combined with a dark eye, averted as in trouble
and shame, and then again recalling Don Benito’s confessed ill opinion
of his crew, insensibly he was operated upon by certain general notions
which, while disconnecting pain and abashment from virtue, invariably
link them with vice.

If, indeed, there be any wickedness on board this ship, thought Captain
Delano, be sure that man there has fouled his hand in it, even as now
he fouls it in the pitch. I don’t like to accost him. I will speak to
this other, this old Jack here on the windlass.

He advanced to an old Barcelona tar, in ragged red breeches and dirty
night-cap, cheeks trenched and bronzed, whiskers dense as thorn hedges.
Seated between two sleepy-looking Africans, this mariner, like his
younger shipmate, was employed upon some rigging—splicing a cable—the
sleepy-looking blacks performing the inferior function of holding the
outer parts of the ropes for him.

Upon Captain Delano’s approach, the man at once hung his head below its
previous level; the one necessary for business. It appeared as if he
desired to be thought absorbed, with more than common fidelity, in his
task. Being addressed, he glanced up, but with what seemed a furtive,
diffident air, which sat strangely enough on his weather-beaten visage,
much as if a grizzly bear, instead of growling and biting, should
simper and cast sheep’s eyes. He was asked several questions concerning
the voyage—questions purposely referring to several particulars in Don
Benito’s narrative, not previously corroborated by those impulsive
cries greeting the visitor on first coming on board. The questions were
briefly answered, confirming all that remained to be confirmed of the
story. The negroes about the windlass joined in with the old sailor;
but, as they became talkative, he by degrees became mute, and at length
quite glum, seemed morosely unwilling to answer more questions, and
yet, all the while, this ursine air was somehow mixed with his sheepish
one.

Despairing of getting into unembarrassed talk with such a centaur,
Captain Delano, after glancing round for a more promising countenance,
but seeing none, spoke pleasantly to the blacks to make way for him;
and so, amid various grins and grimaces, returned to the poop, feeling
a little strange at first, he could hardly tell why, but upon the whole
with regained confidence in Benito Cereno.

How plainly, thought he, did that old whiskerando yonder betray a
consciousness of ill desert. No doubt, when he saw me coming, he
dreaded lest I, apprised by his Captain of the crew’s general
misbehavior, came with sharp words for him, and so down with his head.
And yet—and yet, now that I think of it, that very old fellow, if I err
not, was one of those who seemed so earnestly eying me here awhile
since. Ah, these currents spin one’s head round almost as much as they
do the ship. Ha, there now’s a pleasant sort of sunny sight; quite
sociable, too.

His attention had been drawn to a slumbering negress, partly disclosed
through the lacework of some rigging, lying, with youthful limbs
carelessly disposed, under the lee of the bulwarks, like a doe in the
shade of a woodland rock. Sprawling at her lapped breasts, was her
wide-awake fawn, stark naked, its black little body half lifted from
the deck, crosswise with its dam’s; its hands, like two paws,
clambering upon her; its mouth and nose ineffectually rooting to get at
the mark; and meantime giving a vexatious half-grunt, blending with the
composed snore of the negress.

The uncommon vigor of the child at length roused the mother. She
started up, at a distance facing Captain Delano. But as if not at all
concerned at the attitude in which she had been caught, delightedly she
caught the child up, with maternal transports, covering it with kisses.

There’s naked nature, now; pure tenderness and love, thought Captain
Delano, well pleased.

This incident prompted him to remark the other negresses more
particularly than before. He was gratified with their manners: like
most uncivilized women, they seemed at once tender of heart and tough
of constitution; equally ready to die for their infants or fight for
them. Unsophisticated as leopardesses; loving as doves. Ah! thought
Captain Delano, these, perhaps, are some of the very women whom Ledyard
saw in Africa, and gave such a noble account of.

These natural sights somehow insensibly deepened his confidence and
ease. At last he looked to see how his boat was getting on; but it was
still pretty remote. He turned to see if Don Benito had returned; but
he had not.

To change the scene, as well as to please himself with a leisurely
observation of the coming boat, stepping over into the mizzen-chains,
he clambered his way into the starboard quarter-gallery—one of those
abandoned Venetian-looking water-balconies previously
mentioned—retreats cut off from the deck. As his foot pressed the
half-damp, half-dry sea-mosses matting the place, and a chance phantom
cats-paw—an islet of breeze, unheralded, unfollowed—as this ghostly
cats-paw came fanning his cheek; as his glance fell upon the row of
small, round dead-lights—all closed like coppered eyes of the
coffined—and the state-cabin door, once connecting with the gallery,
even as the dead-lights had once looked out upon it, but now calked
fast like a sarcophagus lid; and to a purple-black tarred-over, panel,
threshold, and post; and he bethought him of the time, when that
state-cabin and this state-balcony had heard the voices of the Spanish
king’s officers, and the forms of the Lima viceroy’s daughters had
perhaps leaned where he stood—as these and other images flitted through
his mind, as the cats-paw through the calm, gradually he felt rising a
dreamy inquietude, like that of one who alone on the prairie feels
unrest from the repose of the noon.

He leaned against the carved balustrade, again looking off toward his
boat; but found his eye falling upon the ribbon grass, trailing along
the ship’s water-line, straight as a border of green box; and parterres
of sea-weed, broad ovals and crescents, floating nigh and far, with
what seemed long formal alleys between, crossing the terraces of
swells, and sweeping round as if leading to the grottoes below. And
overhanging all was the balustrade by his arm, which, partly stained
with pitch and partly embossed with moss, seemed the charred ruin of
some summer-house in a grand garden long running to waste.

Trying to break one charm, he was but becharmed anew. Though upon the
wide sea, he seemed in some far inland country; prisoner in some
deserted château, left to stare at empty grounds, and peer out at vague
roads, where never wagon or wayfarer passed.

But these enchantments were a little disenchanted as his eye fell on
the corroded main-chains. Of an ancient style, massy and rusty in link,
shackle and bolt, they seemed even more fit for the ship’s present
business than the one for which she had been built.

Presently he thought something moved nigh the chains. He rubbed his
eyes, and looked hard. Groves of rigging were about the chains; and
there, peering from behind a great stay, like an Indian from behind a
hemlock, a Spanish sailor, a marlingspike in his hand, was seen, who
made what seemed an imperfect gesture towards the balcony, but
immediately as if alarmed by some advancing step along the deck within,
vanished into the recesses of the hempen forest, like a poacher.

What meant this? Something the man had sought to communicate, unbeknown
to any one, even to his captain. Did the secret involve aught
unfavorable to his captain? Were those previous misgivings of Captain
Delano’s about to be verified? Or, in his haunted mood at the moment,
had some random, unintentional motion of the man, while busy with the
stay, as if repairing it, been mistaken for a significant beckoning?

Not unbewildered, again he gazed off for his boat. But it was
temporarily hidden by a rocky spur of the isle. As with some eagerness
he bent forward, watching for the first shooting view of its beak, the
balustrade gave way before him like charcoal. Had he not clutched an
outreaching rope he would have fallen into the sea. The crash, though
feeble, and the fall, though hollow, of the rotten fragments, must have
been overheard. He glanced up. With sober curiosity peering down upon
him was one of the old oakum-pickers, slipped from his perch to an
outside boom; while below the old negro, and, invisible to him,
reconnoitering from a port-hole like a fox from the mouth of its den,
crouched the Spanish sailor again. From something suddenly suggested by
the man’s air, the mad idea now darted into Captain Delano’s mind, that
Don Benito’s plea of indisposition, in withdrawing below, was but a
pretense: that he was engaged there maturing his plot, of which the
sailor, by some means gaining an inkling, had a mind to warn the
stranger against; incited, it may be, by gratitude for a kind word on
first boarding the ship. Was it from foreseeing some possible
interference like this, that Don Benito had, beforehand, given such a
bad character of his sailors, while praising the negroes; though,
indeed, the former seemed as docile as the latter the contrary? The
whites, too, by nature, were the shrewder race. A man with some evil
design, would he not be likely to speak well of that stupidity which
was blind to his depravity, and malign that intelligence from which it
might not be hidden? Not unlikely, perhaps. But if the whites had dark
secrets concerning Don Benito, could then Don Benito be any way in
complicity with the blacks? But they were too stupid. Besides, who ever
heard of a white so far a renegade as to apostatize from his very
species almost, by leaguing in against it with negroes? These
difficulties recalled former ones. Lost in their mazes, Captain Delano,
who had now regained the deck, was uneasily advancing along it, when he
observed a new face; an aged sailor seated cross-legged near the main
hatchway. His skin was shrunk up with wrinkles like a pelican’s empty
pouch; his hair frosted; his countenance grave and composed. His hands
were full of ropes, which he was working into a large knot. Some blacks
were about him obligingly dipping the strands for him, here and there,
as the exigencies of the operation demanded.

Captain Delano crossed over to him, and stood in silence surveying the
knot; his mind, by a not uncongenial transition, passing from its own
entanglements to those of the hemp. For intricacy, such a knot he had
never seen in an American ship, nor indeed any other. The old man
looked like an Egyptian priest, making Gordian knots for the temple of
Ammon. The knot seemed a combination of double-bowline-knot,
treble-crown-knot, back-handed-well-knot, knot-in-and-out-knot, and
jamming-knot.

At last, puzzled to comprehend the meaning of such a knot, Captain
Delano addressed the knotter:—

“What are you knotting there, my man?”

“The knot,” was the brief reply, without looking up.

“So it seems; but what is it for?”

“For some one else to undo,” muttered back the old man, plying his
fingers harder than ever, the knot being now nearly completed.

While Captain Delano stood watching him, suddenly the old man threw the
knot towards him, saying in broken English—the first heard in the
ship—something to this effect: “Undo it, cut it, quick.” It was said
lowly, but with such condensation of rapidity, that the long, slow
words in Spanish, which had preceded and followed, almost operated as
covers to the brief English between.

For a moment, knot in hand, and knot in head, Captain Delano stood
mute; while, without further heeding him, the old man was now intent
upon other ropes. Presently there was a slight stir behind Captain
Delano. Turning, he saw the chained negro, Atufal, standing quietly
there. The next moment the old sailor rose, muttering, and, followed by
his subordinate negroes, removed to the forward part of the ship, where
in the crowd he disappeared.

An elderly negro, in a clout like an infant’s, and with a pepper and
salt head, and a kind of attorney air, now approached Captain Delano.
In tolerable Spanish, and with a good-natured, knowing wink, he
informed him that the old knotter was simple-witted, but harmless;
often playing his odd tricks. The negro concluded by begging the knot,
for of course the stranger would not care to be troubled with it.
Unconsciously, it was handed to him. With a sort of congé, the negro
received it, and, turning his back, ferreted into it like a detective
custom-house officer after smuggled laces. Soon, with some African
word, equivalent to pshaw, he tossed the knot overboard.

All this is very queer now, thought Captain Delano, with a qualmish
sort of emotion; but, as one feeling incipient sea-sickness, he strove,
by ignoring the symptoms, to get rid of the malady. Once more he looked
off for his boat. To his delight, it was now again in view, leaving the
rocky spur astern.

The sensation here experienced, after at first relieving his
uneasiness, with unforeseen efficacy soon began to remove it. The less
distant sight of that well-known boat—showing it, not as before, half
blended with the haze, but with outline defined, so that its
individuality, like a man’s, was manifest; that boat, Rover by name,
which, though now in strange seas, had often pressed the beach of
Captain Delano’s home, and, brought to its threshold for repairs, had
familiarly lain there, as a Newfoundland dog; the sight of that
household boat evoked a thousand trustful associations, which,
contrasted with previous suspicions, filled him not only with lightsome
confidence, but somehow with half humorous self-reproaches at his
former lack of it.

“What, I, Amasa Delano—Jack of the Beach, as they called me when a
lad—I, Amasa; the same that, duck-satchel in hand, used to paddle along
the water-side to the school-house made from the old hulk—I, little
Jack of the Beach, that used to go berrying with cousin Nat and the
rest; I to be murdered here at the ends of the earth, on board a
haunted pirate-ship by a horrible Spaniard? Too nonsensical to think
of! Who would murder Amasa Delano? His conscience is clean. There is
some one above. Fie, fie, Jack of the Beach! you are a child indeed; a
child of the second childhood, old boy; you are beginning to dote and
drule, I’m afraid.”

Light of heart and foot, he stepped aft, and there was met by Don
Benito’s servant, who, with a pleasing expression, responsive to his
own present feelings, informed him that his master had recovered from
the effects of his coughing fit, and had just ordered him to go present
his compliments to his good guest, Don Amasa, and say that he (Don
Benito) would soon have the happiness to rejoin him.

There now, do you mark that? again thought Captain Delano, walking the
poop. What a donkey I was. This kind gentleman who here sends me his
kind compliments, he, but ten minutes ago, dark-lantern in had, was
dodging round some old grind-stone in the hold, sharpening a hatchet
for me, I thought. Well, well; these long calms have a morbid effect on
the mind, I’ve often heard, though I never believed it before. Ha!
glancing towards the boat; there’s Rover; good dog; a white bone in her
mouth. A pretty big bone though, seems to me.—What? Yes, she has fallen
afoul of the bubbling tide-rip there. It sets her the other way, too,
for the time. Patience.

It was now about noon, though, from the grayness of everything, it
seemed to be getting towards dusk.

The calm was confirmed. In the far distance, away from the influence of
land, the leaden ocean seemed laid out and leaded up, its course
finished, soul gone, defunct. But the current from landward, where the
ship was, increased; silently sweeping her further and further towards
the tranced waters beyond.

Still, from his knowledge of those latitudes, cherishing hopes of a
breeze, and a fair and fresh one, at any moment, Captain Delano,
despite present prospects, buoyantly counted upon bringing the San
Dominick safely to anchor ere night. The distance swept over was
nothing; since, with a good wind, ten minutes’ sailing would retrace
more than sixty minutes, drifting. Meantime, one moment turning to mark
“Rover” fighting the tide-rip, and the next to see Don Benito
approaching, he continued walking the poop.

Gradually he felt a vexation arising from the delay of his boat; this
soon merged into uneasiness; and at last—his eye falling continually,
as from a stage-box into the pit, upon the strange crowd before and
below him, and, by-and-by, recognizing there the face—now composed to
indifference—of the Spanish sailor who had seemed to beckon from the
main-chains—something of his old trepidations returned.

Ah, thought he—gravely enough—this is like the ague: because it went
off, it follows not that it won’t come back.

Though ashamed of the relapse, he could not altogether subdue it; and
so, exerting his good-nature to the utmost, insensibly he came to a
compromise.

Yes, this is a strange craft; a strange history, too, and strange folks
on board. But—nothing more.

By way of keeping his mind out of mischief till the boat should arrive,
he tried to occupy it with turning over and over, in a purely
speculative sort of way, some lesser peculiarities of the captain and
crew. Among others, four curious points recurred:

First, the affair of the Spanish lad assailed with a knife by the slave
boy; an act winked at by Don Benito. Second, the tyranny in Don
Benito’s treatment of Atufal, the black; as if a child should lead a
bull of the Nile by the ring in his nose. Third, the trampling of the
sailor by the two negroes; a piece of insolence passed over without so
much as a reprimand. Fourth, the cringing submission to their master,
of all the ship’s underlings, mostly blacks; as if by the least
inadvertence they feared to draw down his despotic displeasure.

Coupling these points, they seemed somewhat contradictory. But what
then, thought Captain Delano, glancing towards his now nearing
boat—what then? Why, Don Benito is a very capricious commander. But he
is not the first of the sort I have seen; though it’s true he rather
exceeds any other. But as a nation—continued he in his reveries—these
Spaniards are all an odd set; the very word Spaniard has a curious,
conspirator, Guy-Fawkish twang to it. And yet, I dare say, Spaniards in
the main are as good folks as any in Duxbury, Massachusetts. Ah good!
At last “Rover” has come.

As, with its welcome freight, the boat touched the side, the
oakum-pickers, with venerable gestures, sought to restrain the blacks,
who, at the sight of three gurried water-casks in its bottom, and a
pile of wilted pumpkins in its bow, hung over the bulwarks in
disorderly raptures.

Don Benito, with his servant, now appeared; his coming, perhaps,
hastened by hearing the noise. Of him Captain Delano sought permission
to serve out the water, so that all might share alike, and none injure
themselves by unfair excess. But sensible, and, on Don Benito’s
account, kind as this offer was, it was received with what seemed
impatience; as if aware that he lacked energy as a commander, Don
Benito, with the true jealousy of weakness, resented as an affront any
interference. So, at least, Captain Delano inferred.

In another moment the casks were being hoisted in, when some of the
eager negroes accidentally jostled Captain Delano, where he stood by
the gangway; so, that, unmindful of Don Benito, yielding to the impulse
of the moment, with good-natured authority he bade the blacks stand
back; to enforce his words making use of a half-mirthful, half-menacing
gesture. Instantly the blacks paused, just where they were, each negro
and negress suspended in his or her posture, exactly as the word had
found them—for a few seconds continuing so—while, as between the
responsive posts of a telegraph, an unknown syllable ran from man to
man among the perched oakum-pickers. While the visitor’s attention was
fixed by this scene, suddenly the hatchet-polishers half rose, and a
rapid cry came from Don Benito.

Thinking that at the signal of the Spaniard he was about to be
massacred, Captain Delano would have sprung for his boat, but paused,
as the oakum-pickers, dropping down into the crowd with earnest
exclamations, forced every white and every negro back, at the same
moment, with gestures friendly and familiar, almost jocose, bidding
him, in substance, not be a fool. Simultaneously the hatchet-polishers
resumed their seats, quietly as so many tailors, and at once, as if
nothing had happened, the work of hoisting in the casks was resumed,
whites and blacks singing at the tackle.

Captain Delano glanced towards Don Benito. As he saw his meagre form in
the act of recovering itself from reclining in the servant’s arms, into
which the agitated invalid had fallen, he could not but marvel at the
panic by which himself had been surprised, on the darting supposition
that such a commander, who, upon a legitimate occasion, so trivial,
too, as it now appeared, could lose all self-command, was, with
energetic iniquity, going to bring about his murder.

The casks being on deck, Captain Delano was handed a number of jars and
cups by one of the steward’s aids, who, in the name of his captain,
entreated him to do as he had proposed—dole out the water. He complied,
with republican impartiality as to this republican element, which
always seeks one level, serving the oldest white no better than the
youngest black; excepting, indeed, poor Don Benito, whose condition, if
not rank, demanded an extra allowance. To him, in the first place,
Captain Delano presented a fair pitcher of the fluid; but, thirsting as
he was for it, the Spaniard quaffed not a drop until after several
grave bows and salutes. A reciprocation of courtesies which the
sight-loving Africans hailed with clapping of hands.

Two of the less wilted pumpkins being reserved for the cabin table, the
residue were minced up on the spot for the general regalement. But the
soft bread, sugar, and bottled cider, Captain Delano would have given
the whites alone, and in chief Don Benito; but the latter objected;
which disinterestedness not a little pleased the American; and so
mouthfuls all around were given alike to whites and blacks; excepting
one bottle of cider, which Babo insisted upon setting aside for his
master.

Here it may be observed that as, on the first visit of the boat, the
American had not permitted his men to board the ship, neither did he
now; being unwilling to add to the confusion of the decks.

Not uninfluenced by the peculiar good-humor at present prevailing, and
for the time oblivious of any but benevolent thoughts, Captain Delano,
who, from recent indications, counted upon a breeze within an hour or
two at furthest, dispatched the boat back to the sealer, with orders
for all the hands that could be spared immediately to set about rafting
casks to the watering-place and filling them. Likewise he bade word be
carried to his chief officer, that if, against present expectation, the
ship was not brought to anchor by sunset, he need be under no concern;
for as there was to be a full moon that night, he (Captain Delano)
would remain on board ready to play the pilot, come the wind soon or
late.

As the two Captains stood together, observing the departing boat—the
servant, as it happened, having just spied a spot on his master’s
velvet sleeve, and silently engaged rubbing it out—the American
expressed his regrets that the San Dominick had no boats; none, at
least, but the unseaworthy old hulk of the long-boat, which, warped as
a camel’s skeleton in the desert, and almost as bleached, lay pot-wise
inverted amidships, one side a little tipped, furnishing a
subterraneous sort of den for family groups of the blacks, mostly women
and small children; who, squatting on old mats below, or perched above
in the dark dome, on the elevated seats, were descried, some distance
within, like a social circle of bats, sheltering in some friendly cave;
at intervals, ebon flights of naked boys and girls, three or four years
old, darting in and out of the den’s mouth.

“Had you three or four boats now, Don Benito,” said Captain Delano, “I
think that, by tugging at the oars, your negroes here might help along
matters some. Did you sail from port without boats, Don Benito?”

“They were stove in the gales, Señor.”

“That was bad. Many men, too, you lost then. Boats and men. Those must
have been hard gales, Don Benito.”

“Past all speech,” cringed the Spaniard.

“Tell me, Don Benito,” continued his companion with increased interest,
“tell me, were these gales immediately off the pitch of Cape Horn?”

“Cape Horn?—who spoke of Cape Horn?”

“Yourself did, when giving me an account of your voyage,” answered
Captain Delano, with almost equal astonishment at this eating of his
own words, even as he ever seemed eating his own heart, on the part of
the Spaniard. “You yourself, Don Benito, spoke of Cape Horn,” he
emphatically repeated.

The Spaniard turned, in a sort of stooping posture, pausing an instant,
as one about to make a plunging exchange of elements, as from air to
water.

At this moment a messenger-boy, a white, hurried by, in the regular
performance of his function carrying the last expired half hour forward
to the forecastle, from the cabin time-piece, to have it struck at the
ship’s large bell.

“Master,” said the servant, discontinuing his work on the coat sleeve,
and addressing the rapt Spaniard with a sort of timid apprehensiveness,
as one charged with a duty, the discharge of which, it was foreseen,
would prove irksome to the very person who had imposed it, and for
whose benefit it was intended, “master told me never mind where he was,
or how engaged, always to remind him to a minute, when shaving-time
comes. Miguel has gone to strike the half-hour afternoon. It is _now_,
master. Will master go into the cuddy?”

“Ah—yes,” answered the Spaniard, starting, as from dreams into
realities; then turning upon Captain Delano, he said that ere long he
would resume the conversation.

“Then if master means to talk more to Don Amasa,” said the servant,
“why not let Don Amasa sit by master in the cuddy, and master can talk,
and Don Amasa can listen, while Babo here lathers and strops.”

“Yes,” said Captain Delano, not unpleased with this sociable plan,
“yes, Don Benito, unless you had rather not, I will go with you.”

“Be it so, Señor.”

As the three passed aft, the American could not but think it another
strange instance of his host’s capriciousness, this being shaved with
such uncommon punctuality in the middle of the day. But he deemed it
more than likely that the servant’s anxious fidelity had something to
do with the matter; inasmuch as the timely interruption served to rally
his master from the mood which had evidently been coming upon him.

The place called the cuddy was a light deck-cabin formed by the poop, a
sort of attic to the large cabin below. Part of it had formerly been
the quarters of the officers; but since their death all the
partitioning had been thrown down, and the whole interior converted
into one spacious and airy marine hall; for absence of fine furniture
and picturesque disarray of odd appurtenances, somewhat answering to
the wide, cluttered hall of some eccentric bachelor-squire in the
country, who hangs his shooting-jacket and tobacco-pouch on deer
antlers, and keeps his fishing-rod, tongs, and walking-stick in the
same corner.

The similitude was heightened, if not originally suggested, by glimpses
of the surrounding sea; since, in one aspect, the country and the ocean
seem cousins-german.

The floor of the cuddy was matted. Overhead, four or five old muskets
were stuck into horizontal holes along the beams. On one side was a
claw-footed old table lashed to the deck; a thumbed missal on it, and
over it a small, meagre crucifix attached to the bulk-head. Under the
table lay a dented cutlass or two, with a hacked harpoon, among some
melancholy old rigging, like a heap of poor friars’ girdles. There were
also two long, sharp-ribbed settees of Malacca cane, black with age,
and uncomfortable to look at as inquisitors’ racks, with a large,
misshapen arm-chair, which, furnished with a rude barber’s crotch at
the back, working with a screw, seemed some grotesque engine of
torment. A flag locker was in one corner, open, exposing various
colored bunting, some rolled up, others half unrolled, still others
tumbled. Opposite was a cumbrous washstand, of black mahogany, all of
one block, with a pedestal, like a font, and over it a railed shelf,
containing combs, brushes, and other implements of the toilet. A torn
hammock of stained grass swung near; the sheets tossed, and the pillow
wrinkled up like a brow, as if who ever slept here slept but illy, with
alternate visitations of sad thoughts and bad dreams.

The further extremity of the cuddy, overhanging the ship’s stern, was
pierced with three openings, windows or port-holes, according as men or
cannon might peer, socially or unsocially, out of them. At present
neither men nor cannon were seen, though huge ring-bolts and other
rusty iron fixtures of the wood-work hinted of twenty-four-pounders.

Glancing towards the hammock as he entered, Captain Delano said, “You
sleep here, Don Benito?”

“Yes, Señor, since we got into mild weather.”

“This seems a sort of dormitory, sitting-room, sail-loft, chapel,
armory, and private closet all together, Don Benito,” added Captain
Delano, looking round.

“Yes, Señor; events have not been favorable to much order in my
arrangements.”

Here the servant, napkin on arm, made a motion as if waiting his
master’s good pleasure. Don Benito signified his readiness, when,
seating him in the Malacca arm-chair, and for the guest’s convenience
drawing opposite one of the settees, the servant commenced operations
by throwing back his master’s collar and loosening his cravat.

There is something in the negro which, in a peculiar way, fits him for
avocations about one’s person. Most negroes are natural valets and
hair-dressers; taking to the comb and brush congenially as to the
castinets, and flourishing them apparently with almost equal
satisfaction. There is, too, a smooth tact about them in this
employment, with a marvelous, noiseless, gliding briskness, not
ungraceful in its way, singularly pleasing to behold, and still more so
to be the manipulated subject of. And above all is the great gift of
good-humor. Not the mere grin or laugh is here meant. Those were
unsuitable. But a certain easy cheerfulness, harmonious in every glance
and gesture; as though God had set the whole negro to some pleasant
tune.

When to this is added the docility arising from the unaspiring
contentment of a limited mind and that susceptibility of blind
attachment sometimes inhering in indisputable inferiors, one readily
perceives why those hypochondriacs, Johnson and Byron—it may be,
something like the hypochondriac Benito Cereno—took to their hearts,
almost to the exclusion of the entire white race, their serving men,
the negroes, Barber and Fletcher. But if there be that in the negro
which exempts him from the inflicted sourness of the morbid or cynical
mind, how, in his most prepossessing aspects, must he appear to a
benevolent one? When at ease with respect to exterior things, Captain
Delano’s nature was not only benign, but familiarly and humorously so.
At home, he had often taken rare satisfaction in sitting in his door,
watching some free man of color at his work or play. If on a voyage he
chanced to have a black sailor, invariably he was on chatty and
half-gamesome terms with him. In fact, like most men of a good, blithe
heart, Captain Delano took to negroes, not philanthropically, but
genially, just as other men to Newfoundland dogs.

Hitherto, the circumstances in which he found the San Dominick had
repressed the tendency. But in the cuddy, relieved from his former
uneasiness, and, for various reasons, more sociably inclined than at
any previous period of the day, and seeing the colored servant, napkin
on arm, so debonair about his master, in a business so familiar as that
of shaving, too, all his old weakness for negroes returned.

Among other things, he was amused with an odd instance of the African
love of bright colors and fine shows, in the black’s informally taking
from the flag-locker a great piece of bunting of all hues, and lavishly
tucking it under his master’s chin for an apron.

The mode of shaving among the Spaniards is a little different from what
it is with other nations. They have a basin, specifically called a
barber’s basin, which on one side is scooped out, so as accurately to
receive the chin, against which it is closely held in lathering; which
is done, not with a brush, but with soap dipped in the water of the
basin and rubbed on the face.

In the present instance salt-water was used for lack of better; and the
parts lathered were only the upper lip, and low down under the throat,
all the rest being cultivated beard.

The preliminaries being somewhat novel to Captain Delano, he sat
curiously eying them, so that no conversation took place, nor, for the
present, did Don Benito appear disposed to renew any.

Setting down his basin, the negro searched among the razors, as for the
sharpest, and having found it, gave it an additional edge by expertly
strapping it on the firm, smooth, oily skin of his open palm; he then
made a gesture as if to begin, but midway stood suspended for an
instant, one hand elevating the razor, the other professionally
dabbling among the bubbling suds on the Spaniard’s lank neck. Not
unaffected by the close sight of the gleaming steel, Don Benito
nervously shuddered; his usual ghastliness was heightened by the
lather, which lather, again, was intensified in its hue by the
contrasting sootiness of the negro’s body. Altogether the scene was
somewhat peculiar, at least to Captain Delano, nor, as he saw the two
thus postured, could he resist the vagary, that in the black he saw a
headsman, and in the white a man at the block. But this was one of
those antic conceits, appearing and vanishing in a breath, from which,
perhaps, the best regulated mind is not always free.

Meantime the agitation of the Spaniard had a little loosened the
bunting from around him, so that one broad fold swept curtain-like over
the chair-arm to the floor, revealing, amid a profusion of armorial
bars and ground-colors—black, blue, and yellow—a closed castle in a
blood red field diagonal with a lion rampant in a white.

“The castle and the lion,” exclaimed Captain Delano—“why, Don Benito,
this is the flag of Spain you use here. It’s well it’s only I, and not
the King, that sees this,” he added, with a smile, “but”—turning
towards the black—“it’s all one, I suppose, so the colors be gay;”
which playful remark did not fail somewhat to tickle the negro.

“Now, master,” he said, readjusting the flag, and pressing the head
gently further back into the crotch of the chair; “now, master,” and
the steel glanced nigh the throat.

Again Don Benito faintly shuddered.

“You must not shake so, master. See, Don Amasa, master always shakes
when I shave him. And yet master knows I never yet have drawn blood,
though it’s true, if master will shake so, I may some of these times.
Now master,” he continued. “And now, Don Amasa, please go on with your
talk about the gale, and all that; master can hear, and, between times,
master can answer.”

“Ah yes, these gales,” said Captain Delano; “but the more I think of
your voyage, Don Benito, the more I wonder, not at the gales, terrible
as they must have been, but at the disastrous interval following them.
For here, by your account, have you been these two months and more
getting from Cape Horn to St. Maria, a distance which I myself, with a
good wind, have sailed in a few days. True, you had calms, and long
ones, but to be becalmed for two months, that is, at least, unusual.
Why, Don Benito, had almost any other gentleman told me such a story, I
should have been half disposed to a little incredulity.”

Here an involuntary expression came over the Spaniard, similar to that
just before on the deck, and whether it was the start he gave, or a
sudden gawky roll of the hull in the calm, or a momentary unsteadiness
of the servant’s hand, however it was, just then the razor drew blood,
spots of which stained the creamy lather under the throat: immediately
the black barber drew back his steel, and, remaining in his
professional attitude, back to Captain Delano, and face to Don Benito,
held up the trickling razor, saying, with a sort of half humorous
sorrow, “See, master—you shook so—here’s Babo’s first blood.”

No sword drawn before James the First of England, no assassination in
that timid King’s presence, could have produced a more terrified aspect
than was now presented by Don Benito.

Poor fellow, thought Captain Delano, so nervous he can’t even bear the
sight of barber’s blood; and this unstrung, sick man, is it credible
that I should have imagined he meant to spill all my blood, who can’t
endure the sight of one little drop of his own? Surely, Amasa Delano,
you have been beside yourself this day. Tell it not when you get home,
sappy Amasa. Well, well, he looks like a murderer, doesn’t he? More
like as if himself were to be done for. Well, well, this day’s
experience shall be a good lesson.

Meantime, while these things were running through the honest seaman’s
mind, the servant had taken the napkin from his arm, and to Don Benito
had said—“But answer Don Amasa, please, master, while I wipe this ugly
stuff off the razor, and strop it again.”

As he said the words, his face was turned half round, so as to be alike
visible to the Spaniard and the American, and seemed, by its
expression, to hint, that he was desirous, by getting his master to go
on with the conversation, considerately to withdraw his attention from
the recent annoying accident. As if glad to snatch the offered relief,
Don Benito resumed, rehearsing to Captain Delano, that not only were
the calms of unusual duration, but the ship had fallen in with
obstinate currents; and other things he added, some of which were but
repetitions of former statements, to explain how it came to pass that
the passage from Cape Horn to St. Maria had been so exceedingly long;
now and then, mingling with his words, incidental praises, less
qualified than before, to the blacks, for their general good conduct.
These particulars were not given consecutively, the servant, at
convenient times, using his razor, and so, between the intervals of
shaving, the story and panegyric went on with more than usual
huskiness.

To Captain Delano’s imagination, now again not wholly at rest, there
was something so hollow in the Spaniard’s manner, with apparently some
reciprocal hollowness in the servant’s dusky comment of silence, that
the idea flashed across him, that possibly master and man, for some
unknown purpose, were acting out, both in word and deed, nay, to the
very tremor of Don Benito’s limbs, some juggling play before him.
Neither did the suspicion of collusion lack apparent support, from the
fact of those whispered conferences before mentioned. But then, what
could be the object of enacting this play of the barber before him? At
last, regarding the notion as a whimsy, insensibly suggested, perhaps,
by the theatrical aspect of Don Benito in his harlequin ensign, Captain
Delano speedily banished it.

The shaving over, the servant bestirred himself with a small bottle of
scented waters, pouring a few drops on the head, and then diligently
rubbing; the vehemence of the exercise causing the muscles of his face
to twitch rather strangely.

His next operation was with comb, scissors, and brush; going round and
round, smoothing a curl here, clipping an unruly whisker-hair there,
giving a graceful sweep to the temple-lock, with other impromptu
touches evincing the hand of a master; while, like any resigned
gentleman in barber’s hands, Don Benito bore all, much less uneasily,
at least than he had done the razoring; indeed, he sat so pale and
rigid now, that the negro seemed a Nubian sculptor finishing off a
white statue-head.

All being over at last, the standard of Spain removed, tumbled up, and
tossed back into the flag-locker, the negro’s warm breath blowing away
any stray hair, which might have lodged down his master’s neck; collar
and cravat readjusted; a speck of lint whisked off the velvet lapel;
all this being done; backing off a little space, and pausing with an
expression of subdued self-complacency, the servant for a moment
surveyed his master, as, in toilet at least, the creature of his own
tasteful hands.

Captain Delano playfully complimented him upon his achievement; at the
same time congratulating Don Benito.

But neither sweet waters, nor shampooing, nor fidelity, nor sociality,
delighted the Spaniard. Seeing him relapsing into forbidding gloom, and
still remaining seated, Captain Delano, thinking that his presence was
undesired just then, withdrew, on pretense of seeing whether, as he had
prophesied, any signs of a breeze were visible.

Walking forward to the main-mast, he stood awhile thinking over the
scene, and not without some undefined misgivings, when he heard a noise
near the cuddy, and turning, saw the negro, his hand to his cheek.
Advancing, Captain Delano perceived that the cheek was bleeding. He was
about to ask the cause, when the negro’s wailing soliloquy enlightened
him.

“Ah, when will master get better from his sickness; only the sour heart
that sour sickness breeds made him serve Babo so; cutting Babo with the
razor, because, only by accident, Babo had given master one little
scratch; and for the first time in so many a day, too. Ah, ah, ah,”
holding his hand to his face.

Is it possible, thought Captain Delano; was it to wreak in private his
Spanish spite against this poor friend of his, that Don Benito, by his
sullen manner, impelled me to withdraw? Ah this slavery breeds ugly
passions in man.—Poor fellow!

He was about to speak in sympathy to the negro, but with a timid
reluctance he now re-entered the cuddy.

Presently master and man came forth; Don Benito leaning on his servant
as if nothing had happened.

But a sort of love-quarrel, after all, thought Captain Delano.

He accosted Don Benito, and they slowly walked together. They had gone
but a few paces, when the steward—a tall, rajah-looking mulatto,
orientally set off with a pagoda turban formed by three or four Madras
handkerchiefs wound about his head, tier on tier—approaching with a
saalam, announced lunch in the cabin.

On their way thither, the two captains were preceded by the mulatto,
who, turning round as he advanced, with continual smiles and bows,
ushered them on, a display of elegance which quite completed the
insignificance of the small bare-headed Babo, who, as if not
unconscious of inferiority, eyed askance the graceful steward. But in
part, Captain Delano imputed his jealous watchfulness to that peculiar
feeling which the full-blooded African entertains for the adulterated
one. As for the steward, his manner, if not bespeaking much dignity of
self-respect, yet evidenced his extreme desire to please; which is
doubly meritorious, as at once Christian and Chesterfieldian.

Captain Delano observed with interest that while the complexion of the
mulatto was hybrid, his physiognomy was European—classically so.

“Don Benito,” whispered he, “I am glad to see this
usher-of-the-golden-rod of yours; the sight refutes an ugly remark once
made to me by a Barbadoes planter; that when a mulatto has a regular
European face, look out for him; he is a devil. But see, your steward
here has features more regular than King George’s of England; and yet
there he nods, and bows, and smiles; a king, indeed—the king of kind
hearts and polite fellows. What a pleasant voice he has, too?”

“He has, Señor.”

“But tell me, has he not, so far as you have known him, always proved a
good, worthy fellow?” said Captain Delano, pausing, while with a final
genuflexion the steward disappeared into the cabin; “come, for the
reason just mentioned, I am curious to know.”

“Francesco is a good man,” a sort of sluggishly responded Don Benito,
like a phlegmatic appreciator, who would neither find fault nor
flatter.

“Ah, I thought so. For it were strange, indeed, and not very creditable
to us white-skins, if a little of our blood mixed with the African’s,
should, far from improving the latter’s quality, have the sad effect of
pouring vitriolic acid into black broth; improving the hue, perhaps,
but not the wholesomeness.”

“Doubtless, doubtless, Señor, but”—glancing at Babo—“not to speak of
negroes, your planter’s remark I have heard applied to the Spanish and
Indian intermixtures in our provinces. But I know nothing about the
matter,” he listlessly added.

And here they entered the cabin.

The lunch was a frugal one. Some of Captain Delano’s fresh fish and
pumpkins, biscuit and salt beef, the reserved bottle of cider, and the
San Dominick’s last bottle of Canary.

As they entered, Francesco, with two or three colored aids, was
hovering over the table giving the last adjustments. Upon perceiving
their master they withdrew, Francesco making a smiling congé, and the
Spaniard, without condescending to notice it, fastidiously remarking to
his companion that he relished not superfluous attendance.

Without companions, host and guest sat down, like a childless married
couple, at opposite ends of the table, Don Benito waving Captain Delano
to his place, and, weak as he was, insisting upon that gentleman being
seated before himself.

The negro placed a rug under Don Benito’s feet, and a cushion behind
his back, and then stood behind, not his master’s chair, but Captain
Delano’s. At first, this a little surprised the latter. But it was soon
evident that, in taking his position, the black was still true to his
master; since by facing him he could the more readily anticipate his
slightest want.

“This is an uncommonly intelligent fellow of yours, Don Benito,”
whispered Captain Delano across the table.

“You say true, Señor.”

During the repast, the guest again reverted to parts of Don Benito’s
story, begging further particulars here and there. He inquired how it
was that the scurvy and fever should have committed such wholesale
havoc upon the whites, while destroying less than half of the blacks.
As if this question reproduced the whole scene of plague before the
Spaniard’s eyes, miserably reminding him of his solitude in a cabin
where before he had had so many friends and officers round him, his
hand shook, his face became hueless, broken words escaped; but directly
the sane memory of the past seemed replaced by insane terrors of the
present. With starting eyes he stared before him at vacancy. For
nothing was to be seen but the hand of his servant pushing the Canary
over towards him. At length a few sips served partially to restore him.
He made random reference to the different constitution of races,
enabling one to offer more resistance to certain maladies than another.
The thought was new to his companion.

Presently Captain Delano, intending to say something to his host
concerning the pecuniary part of the business he had undertaken for
him, especially—since he was strictly accountable to his owners—with
reference to the new suit of sails, and other things of that sort; and
naturally preferring to conduct such affairs in private, was desirous
that the servant should withdraw; imagining that Don Benito for a few
minutes could dispense with his attendance. He, however, waited awhile;
thinking that, as the conversation proceeded, Don Benito, without being
prompted, would perceive the propriety of the step.

But it was otherwise. At last catching his host’s eye, Captain Delano,
with a slight backward gesture of his thumb, whispered, “Don Benito,
pardon me, but there is an interference with the full expression of
what I have to say to you.”

Upon this the Spaniard changed countenance; which was imputed to his
resenting the hint, as in some way a reflection upon his servant. After
a moment’s pause, he assured his guest that the black’s remaining with
them could be of no disservice; because since losing his officers he
had made Babo (whose original office, it now appeared, had been captain
of the slaves) not only his constant attendant and companion, but in
all things his confidant.

After this, nothing more could be said; though, indeed, Captain Delano
could hardly avoid some little tinge of irritation upon being left
ungratified in so inconsiderable a wish, by one, too, for whom he
intended such solid services. But it is only his querulousness, thought
he; and so filling his glass he proceeded to business.

The price of the sails and other matters was fixed upon. But while this
was being done, the American observed that, though his original offer
of assistance had been hailed with hectic animation, yet now when it
was reduced to a business transaction, indifference and apathy were
betrayed. Don Benito, in fact, appeared to submit to hearing the
details more out of regard to common propriety, than from any
impression that weighty benefit to himself and his voyage was involved.

Soon, his manner became still more reserved. The effort was vain to
seek to draw him into social talk. Gnawed by his splenetic mood, he sat
twitching his beard, while to little purpose the hand of his servant,
mute as that on the wall, slowly pushed over the Canary.

Lunch being over, they sat down on the cushioned transom; the servant
placing a pillow behind his master. The long continuance of the calm
had now affected the atmosphere. Don Benito sighed heavily, as if for
breath.

“Why not adjourn to the cuddy,” said Captain Delano; “there is more air
there.” But the host sat silent and motionless.

Meantime his servant knelt before him, with a large fan of feathers.
And Francesco coming in on tiptoes, handed the negro a little cup of
aromatic waters, with which at intervals he chafed his master’s brow;
smoothing the hair along the temples as a nurse does a child’s. He
spoke no word. He only rested his eye on his master’s, as if, amid all
Don Benito’s distress, a little to refresh his spirit by the silent
sight of fidelity.

Presently the ship’s bell sounded two o’clock; and through the cabin
windows a slight rippling of the sea was discerned; and from the
desired direction.

“There,” exclaimed Captain Delano, “I told you so, Don Benito, look!”

He had risen to his feet, speaking in a very animated tone, with a view
the more to rouse his companion. But though the crimson curtain of the
stern-window near him that moment fluttered against his pale cheek, Don
Benito seemed to have even less welcome for the breeze than the calm.

Poor fellow, thought Captain Delano, bitter experience has taught him
that one ripple does not make a wind, any more than one swallow a
summer. But he is mistaken for once. I will get his ship in for him,
and prove it.

Briefly alluding to his weak condition, he urged his host to remain
quietly where he was, since he (Captain Delano) would with pleasure
take upon himself the responsibility of making the best use of the
wind.

Upon gaining the deck, Captain Delano started at the unexpected figure
of Atufal, monumentally fixed at the threshold, like one of those
sculptured porters of black marble guarding the porches of Egyptian
tombs.

But this time the start was, perhaps, purely physical. Atufal’s
presence, singularly attesting docility even in sullenness, was
contrasted with that of the hatchet-polishers, who in patience evinced
their industry; while both spectacles showed, that lax as Don Benito’s
general authority might be, still, whenever he chose to exert it, no
man so savage or colossal but must, more or less, bow.

Snatching a trumpet which hung from the bulwarks, with a free step
Captain Delano advanced to the forward edge of the poop, issuing his
orders in his best Spanish. The few sailors and many negroes, all
equally pleased, obediently set about heading the ship towards the
harbor.

While giving some directions about setting a lower stu’n’-sail,
suddenly Captain Delano heard a voice faithfully repeating his orders.
Turning, he saw Babo, now for the time acting, under the pilot, his
original part of captain of the slaves. This assistance proved
valuable. Tattered sails and warped yards were soon brought into some
trim. And no brace or halyard was pulled but to the blithe songs of the
inspirited negroes.

Good fellows, thought Captain Delano, a little training would make fine
sailors of them. Why see, the very women pull and sing too. These must
be some of those Ashantee negresses that make such capital soldiers,
I’ve heard. But who’s at the helm. I must have a good hand there.

He went to see.

The San Dominick steered with a cumbrous tiller, with large horizontal
pullies attached. At each pully-end stood a subordinate black, and
between them, at the tiller-head, the responsible post, a Spanish
seaman, whose countenance evinced his due share in the general
hopefulness and confidence at the coming of the breeze.

He proved the same man who had behaved with so shame-faced an air on
the windlass.

“Ah,—it is you, my man,” exclaimed Captain Delano—“well, no more
sheep’s-eyes now;—look straight forward and keep the ship so. Good
hand, I trust? And want to get into the harbor, don’t you?”

The man assented with an inward chuckle, grasping the tiller-head
firmly. Upon this, unperceived by the American, the two blacks eyed the
sailor intently.

Finding all right at the helm, the pilot went forward to the
forecastle, to see how matters stood there.

The ship now had way enough to breast the current. With the approach of
evening, the breeze would be sure to freshen.

Having done all that was needed for the present, Captain Delano, giving
his last orders to the sailors, turned aft to report affairs to Don
Benito in the cabin; perhaps additionally incited to rejoin him by the
hope of snatching a moment’s private chat while the servant was engaged
upon deck.

From opposite sides, there were, beneath the poop, two approaches to
the cabin; one further forward than the other, and consequently
communicating with a longer passage. Marking the servant still above,
Captain Delano, taking the nighest entrance—the one last named, and at
whose porch Atufal still stood—hurried on his way, till, arrived at the
cabin threshold, he paused an instant, a little to recover from his
eagerness. Then, with the words of his intended business upon his lips,
he entered. As he advanced toward the seated Spaniard, he heard another
footstep, keeping time with his. From the opposite door, a salver in
hand, the servant was likewise advancing.

“Confound the faithful fellow,” thought Captain Delano; “what a
vexatious coincidence.”

Possibly, the vexation might have been something different, were it not
for the brisk confidence inspired by the breeze. But even as it was, he
felt a slight twinge, from a sudden indefinite association in his mind
of Babo with Atufal.

“Don Benito,” said he, “I give you joy; the breeze will hold, and will
increase. By the way, your tall man and time-piece, Atufal, stands
without. By your order, of course?”

Don Benito recoiled, as if at some bland satirical touch, delivered
with such adroit garnish of apparent good breeding as to present no
handle for retort.

He is like one flayed alive, thought Captain Delano; where may one
touch him without causing a shrink?

The servant moved before his master, adjusting a cushion; recalled to
civility, the Spaniard stiffly replied: “you are right. The slave
appears where you saw him, according to my command; which is, that if
at the given hour I am below, he must take his stand and abide my
coming.”

“Ah now, pardon me, but that is treating the poor fellow like an
ex-king indeed. Ah, Don Benito,” smiling, “for all the license you
permit in some things, I fear lest, at bottom, you are a bitter hard
master.”

Again Don Benito shrank; and this time, as the good sailor thought,
from a genuine twinge of his conscience.

Again conversation became constrained. In vain Captain Delano called
attention to the now perceptible motion of the keel gently cleaving the
sea; with lack-lustre eye, Don Benito returned words few and reserved.

By-and-by, the wind having steadily risen, and still blowing right into
the harbor bore the San Dominick swiftly on. Sounding a point of land,
the sealer at distance came into open view.

Meantime Captain Delano had again repaired to the deck, remaining there
some time. Having at last altered the ship’s course, so as to give the
reef a wide berth, he returned for a few moments below.

I will cheer up my poor friend, this time, thought he.

“Better and better,” Don Benito, he cried as he blithely re-entered:
“there will soon be an end to your cares, at least for awhile. For
when, after a long, sad voyage, you know, the anchor drops into the
haven, all its vast weight seems lifted from the captain’s heart. We
are getting on famously, Don Benito. My ship is in sight. Look through
this side-light here; there she is; all a-taunt-o! The Bachelor’s
Delight, my good friend. Ah, how this wind braces one up. Come, you
must take a cup of coffee with me this evening. My old steward will
give you as fine a cup as ever any sultan tasted. What say you, Don
Benito, will you?”

At first, the Spaniard glanced feverishly up, casting a longing look
towards the sealer, while with mute concern his servant gazed into his
face. Suddenly the old ague of coldness returned, and dropping back to
his cushions he was silent.

“You do not answer. Come, all day you have been my host; would you have
hospitality all on one side?”

“I cannot go,” was the response.

“What? it will not fatigue you. The ships will lie together as near as
they can, without swinging foul. It will be little more than stepping
from deck to deck; which is but as from room to room. Come, come, you
must not refuse me.”

“I cannot go,” decisively and repulsively repeated Don Benito.

Renouncing all but the last appearance of courtesy, with a sort of
cadaverous sullenness, and biting his thin nails to the quick, he
glanced, almost glared, at his guest, as if impatient that a stranger’s
presence should interfere with the full indulgence of his morbid hour.
Meantime the sound of the parted waters came more and more gurglingly
and merrily in at the windows; as reproaching him for his dark spleen;
as telling him that, sulk as he might, and go mad with it, nature cared
not a jot; since, whose fault was it, pray?

But the foul mood was now at its depth, as the fair wind at its height.

There was something in the man so far beyond any mere unsociality or
sourness previously evinced, that even the forbearing good-nature of
his guest could no longer endure it. Wholly at a loss to account for
such demeanor, and deeming sickness with eccentricity, however extreme,
no adequate excuse, well satisfied, too, that nothing in his own
conduct could justify it, Captain Delano’s pride began to be roused.
Himself became reserved. But all seemed one to the Spaniard. Quitting
him, therefore, Captain Delano once more went to the deck.

The ship was now within less than two miles of the sealer. The
whale-boat was seen darting over the interval.

To be brief, the two vessels, thanks to the pilot’s skill, ere long
neighborly style lay anchored together.

Before returning to his own vessel, Captain Delano had intended
communicating to Don Benito the smaller details of the proposed
services to be rendered. But, as it was, unwilling anew to subject
himself to rebuffs, he resolved, now that he had seen the San Dominick
safely moored, immediately to quit her, without further allusion to
hospitality or business. Indefinitely postponing his ulterior plans, he
would regulate his future actions according to future circumstances.
His boat was ready to receive him; but his host still tarried below.
Well, thought Captain Delano, if he has little breeding, the more need
to show mine. He descended to the cabin to bid a ceremonious, and, it
may be, tacitly rebukeful adieu. But to his great satisfaction, Don
Benito, as if he began to feel the weight of that treatment with which
his slighted guest had, not indecorously, retaliated upon him, now
supported by his servant, rose to his feet, and grasping Captain
Delano’s hand, stood tremulous; too much agitated to speak. But the
good augury hence drawn was suddenly dashed, by his resuming all his
previous reserve, with augmented gloom, as, with half-averted eyes, he
silently reseated himself on his cushions. With a corresponding return
of his own chilled feelings, Captain Delano bowed and withdrew.

He was hardly midway in the narrow corridor, dim as a tunnel, leading
from the cabin to the stairs, when a sound, as of the tolling for
execution in some jail-yard, fell on his ears. It was the echo of the
ship’s flawed bell, striking the hour, drearily reverberated in this
subterranean vault. Instantly, by a fatality not to be withstood, his
mind, responsive to the portent, swarmed with superstitious suspicions.
He paused. In images far swifter than these sentences, the minutest
details of all his former distrusts swept through him.

Hitherto, credulous good-nature had been too ready to furnish excuses
for reasonable fears. Why was the Spaniard, so superfluously
punctilious at times, now heedless of common propriety in not
accompanying to the side his departing guest? Did indisposition forbid?
Indisposition had not forbidden more irksome exertion that day. His
last equivocal demeanor recurred. He had risen to his feet, grasped his
guest’s hand, motioned toward his hat; then, in an instant, all was
eclipsed in sinister muteness and gloom. Did this imply one brief,
repentant relenting at the final moment, from some iniquitous plot,
followed by remorseless return to it? His last glance seemed to express
a calamitous, yet acquiescent farewell to Captain Delano forever. Why
decline the invitation to visit the sealer that evening? Or was the
Spaniard less hardened than the Jew, who refrained not from supping at
the board of him whom the same night he meant to betray? What imported
all those day-long enigmas and contradictions, except they were
intended to mystify, preliminary to some stealthy blow? Atufal, the
pretended rebel, but punctual shadow, that moment lurked by the
threshold without. He seemed a sentry, and more. Who, by his own
confession, had stationed him there? Was the negro now lying in wait?

The Spaniard behind—his creature before: to rush from darkness to light
was the involuntary choice.

The next moment, with clenched jaw and hand, he passed Atufal, and
stood unharmed in the light. As he saw his trim ship lying peacefully
at anchor, and almost within ordinary call; as he saw his household
boat, with familiar faces in it, patiently rising and falling, on the
short waves by the San Dominick’s side; and then, glancing about the
decks where he stood, saw the oakum-pickers still gravely plying their
fingers; and heard the low, buzzing whistle and industrious hum of the
hatchet-polishers, still bestirring themselves over their endless
occupation; and more than all, as he saw the benign aspect of nature,
taking her innocent repose in the evening; the screened sun in the
quiet camp of the west shining out like the mild light from Abraham’s
tent; as charmed eye and ear took in all these, with the chained figure
of the black, clenched jaw and hand relaxed. Once again he smiled at
the phantoms which had mocked him, and felt something like a tinge of
remorse, that, by harboring them even for a moment, he should, by
implication, have betrayed an atheist doubt of the ever-watchful
Providence above.

There was a few minutes’ delay, while, in obedience to his orders, the
boat was being hooked along to the gangway. During this interval, a
sort of saddened satisfaction stole over Captain Delano, at thinking of
the kindly offices he had that day discharged for a stranger. Ah,
thought he, after good actions one’s conscience is never ungrateful,
however much so the benefited party may be.

Presently, his foot, in the first act of descent into the boat, pressed
the first round of the side-ladder, his face presented inward upon the
deck. In the same moment, he heard his name courteously sounded; and,
to his pleased surprise, saw Don Benito advancing—an unwonted energy in
his air, as if, at the last moment, intent upon making amends for his
recent discourtesy. With instinctive good feeling, Captain Delano,
withdrawing his foot, turned and reciprocally advanced. As he did so,
the Spaniard’s nervous eagerness increased, but his vital energy
failed; so that, the better to support him, the servant, placing his
master’s hand on his naked shoulder, and gently holding it there,
formed himself into a sort of crutch.

When the two captains met, the Spaniard again fervently took the hand
of the American, at the same time casting an earnest glance into his
eyes, but, as before, too much overcome to speak.

I have done him wrong, self-reproachfully thought Captain Delano; his
apparent coldness has deceived me: in no instance has he meant to
offend.

Meantime, as if fearful that the continuance of the scene might too
much unstring his master, the servant seemed anxious to terminate it.
And so, still presenting himself as a crutch, and walking between the
two captains, he advanced with them towards the gangway; while still,
as if full of kindly contrition, Don Benito would not let go the hand
of Captain Delano, but retained it in his, across the black’s body.

Soon they were standing by the side, looking over into the boat, whose
crew turned up their curious eyes. Waiting a moment for the Spaniard to
relinquish his hold, the now embarrassed Captain Delano lifted his
foot, to overstep the threshold of the open gangway; but still Don
Benito would not let go his hand. And yet, with an agitated tone, he
said, “I can go no further; here I must bid you adieu. Adieu, my dear,
dear Don Amasa. Go—go!” suddenly tearing his hand loose, “go, and God
guard you better than me, my best friend.”

Not unaffected, Captain Delano would now have lingered; but catching
the meekly admonitory eye of the servant, with a hasty farewell he
descended into his boat, followed by the continual adieus of Don
Benito, standing rooted in the gangway.

Seating himself in the stern, Captain Delano, making a last salute,
ordered the boat shoved off. The crew had their oars on end. The
bowsmen pushed the boat a sufficient distance for the oars to be
lengthwise dropped. The instant that was done, Don Benito sprang over
the bulwarks, falling at the feet of Captain Delano; at the same time
calling towards his ship, but in tones so frenzied, that none in the
boat could understand him. But, as if not equally obtuse, three
sailors, from three different and distant parts of the ship, splashed
into the sea, swimming after their captain, as if intent upon his
rescue.

The dismayed officer of the boat eagerly asked what this meant. To
which, Captain Delano, turning a disdainful smile upon the
unaccountable Spaniard, answered that, for his part, he neither knew
nor cared; but it seemed as if Don Benito had taken it into his head to
produce the impression among his people that the boat wanted to kidnap
him. “Or else—give way for your lives,” he wildly added, starting at a
clattering hubbub in the ship, above which rang the tocsin of the
hatchet-polishers; and seizing Don Benito by the throat he added, “this
plotting pirate means murder!” Here, in apparent verification of the
words, the servant, a dagger in his hand, was seen on the rail
overhead, poised, in the act of leaping, as if with desperate fidelity
to befriend his master to the last; while, seemingly to aid the black,
the three white sailors were trying to clamber into the hampered bow.
Meantime, the whole host of negroes, as if inflamed at the sight of
their jeopardized captain, impended in one sooty avalanche over the
bulwarks.

All this, with what preceded, and what followed, occurred with such
involutions of rapidity, that past, present, and future seemed one.

Seeing the negro coming, Captain Delano had flung the Spaniard aside,
almost in the very act of clutching him, and, by the unconscious
recoil, shifting his place, with arms thrown up, so promptly grappled
the servant in his descent, that with dagger presented at Captain
Delano’s heart, the black seemed of purpose to have leaped there as to
his mark. But the weapon was wrenched away, and the assailant dashed
down into the bottom of the boat, which now, with disentangled oars,
began to speed through the sea.

At this juncture, the left hand of Captain Delano, on one side, again
clutched the half-reclined Don Benito, heedless that he was in a
speechless faint, while his right-foot, on the other side, ground the
prostrate negro; and his right arm pressed for added speed on the after
oar, his eye bent forward, encouraging his men to their utmost.

But here, the officer of the boat, who had at last succeeded in beating
off the towing sailors, and was now, with face turned aft, assisting
the bowsman at his oar, suddenly called to Captain Delano, to see what
the black was about; while a Portuguese oarsman shouted to him to give
heed to what the Spaniard was saying.

Glancing down at his feet, Captain Delano saw the freed hand of the
servant aiming with a second dagger—a small one, before concealed in
his wool—with this he was snakishly writhing up from the boat’s bottom,
at the heart of his master, his countenance lividly vindictive,
expressing the centred purpose of his soul; while the Spaniard,
half-choked, was vainly shrinking away, with husky words, incoherent to
all but the Portuguese.

That moment, across the long-benighted mind of Captain Delano, a flash
of revelation swept, illuminating, in unanticipated clearness, his
host’s whole mysterious demeanor, with every enigmatic event of the
day, as well as the entire past voyage of the San Dominick. He smote
Babo’s hand down, but his own heart smote him harder. With infinite
pity he withdrew his hold from Don Benito. Not Captain Delano, but Don
Benito, the black, in leaping into the boat, had intended to stab.

Both the black’s hands were held, as, glancing up towards the San
Dominick, Captain Delano, now with scales dropped from his eyes, saw
the negroes, not in misrule, not in tumult, not as if frantically
concerned for Don Benito, but with mask torn away, flourishing hatchets
and knives, in ferocious piratical revolt. Like delirious black
dervishes, the six Ashantees danced on the poop. Prevented by their
foes from springing into the water, the Spanish boys were hurrying up
to the topmost spars, while such of the few Spanish sailors, not
already in the sea, less alert, were descried, helplessly mixed in, on
deck, with the blacks.

Meantime Captain Delano hailed his own vessel, ordering the ports up,
and the guns run out. But by this time the cable of the San Dominick
had been cut; and the fag-end, in lashing out, whipped away the canvas
shroud about the beak, suddenly revealing, as the bleached hull swung
round towards the open ocean, death for the figure-head, in a human
skeleton; chalky comment on the chalked words below, “_Follow your
leader_.”

At the sight, Don Benito, covering his face, wailed out: “’Tis he,
Aranda! my murdered, unburied friend!”

Upon reaching the sealer, calling for ropes, Captain Delano bound the
negro, who made no resistance, and had him hoisted to the deck. He
would then have assisted the now almost helpless Don Benito up the
side; but Don Benito, wan as he was, refused to move, or be moved,
until the negro should have been first put below out of view. When,
presently assured that it was done, he no more shrank from the ascent.

The boat was immediately dispatched back to pick up the three swimming
sailors. Meantime, the guns were in readiness, though, owing to the San
Dominick having glided somewhat astern of the sealer, only the
aftermost one could be brought to bear. With this, they fired six
times; thinking to cripple the fugitive ship by bringing down her
spars. But only a few inconsiderable ropes were shot away. Soon the
ship was beyond the gun’s range, steering broad out of the bay; the
blacks thickly clustering round the bowsprit, one moment with taunting
cries towards the whites, the next with upthrown gestures hailing the
now dusky moors of ocean—cawing crows escaped from the hand of the
fowler.

The first impulse was to slip the cables and give chase. But, upon
second thoughts, to pursue with whale-boat and yawl seemed more
promising.

Upon inquiring of Don Benito what firearms they had on board the San
Dominick, Captain Delano was answered that they had none that could be
used; because, in the earlier stages of the mutiny, a cabin-passenger,
since dead, had secretly put out of order the locks of what few muskets
there were. But with all his remaining strength, Don Benito entreated
the American not to give chase, either with ship or boat; for the
negroes had already proved themselves such desperadoes, that, in case
of a present assault, nothing but a total massacre of the whites could
be looked for. But, regarding this warning as coming from one whose
spirit had been crushed by misery the American did not give up his
design.

The boats were got ready and armed. Captain Delano ordered his men into
them. He was going himself when Don Benito grasped his arm.

“What! have you saved my life, Señor, and are you now going to throw
away your own?”

The officers also, for reasons connected with their interests and those
of the voyage, and a duty owing to the owners, strongly objected
against their commander’s going. Weighing their remonstrances a moment,
Captain Delano felt bound to remain; appointing his chief mate—an
athletic and resolute man, who had been a privateer’s-man—to head the
party. The more to encourage the sailors, they were told, that the
Spanish captain considered his ship good as lost; that she and her
cargo, including some gold and silver, were worth more than a thousand
doubloons. Take her, and no small part should be theirs. The sailors
replied with a shout.

The fugitives had now almost gained an offing. It was nearly night; but
the moon was rising. After hard, prolonged pulling, the boats came up
on the ship’s quarters, at a suitable distance laying upon their oars
to discharge their muskets. Having no bullets to return, the negroes
sent their yells. But, upon the second volley, Indian-like, they
hurtled their hatchets. One took off a sailor’s fingers. Another struck
the whale-boat’s bow, cutting off the rope there, and remaining stuck
in the gunwale like a woodman’s axe. Snatching it, quivering from its
lodgment, the mate hurled it back. The returned gauntlet now stuck in
the ship’s broken quarter-gallery, and so remained.

The negroes giving too hot a reception, the whites kept a more
respectful distance. Hovering now just out of reach of the hurtling
hatchets, they, with a view to the close encounter which must soon
come, sought to decoy the blacks into entirely disarming themselves of
their most murderous weapons in a hand-to-hand fight, by foolishly
flinging them, as missiles, short of the mark, into the sea. But, ere
long, perceiving the stratagem, the negroes desisted, though not before
many of them had to replace their lost hatchets with handspikes; an
exchange which, as counted upon, proved, in the end, favorable to the
assailants.

Meantime, with a strong wind, the ship still clove the water; the boats
alternately falling behind, and pulling up, to discharge fresh volleys.

The fire was mostly directed towards the stern, since there, chiefly,
the negroes, at present, were clustering. But to kill or maim the
negroes was not the object. To take them, with the ship, was the
object. To do it, the ship must be boarded; which could not be done by
boats while she was sailing so fast.

A thought now struck the mate. Observing the Spanish boys still aloft,
high as they could get, he called to them to descend to the yards, and
cut adrift the sails. It was done. About this time, owing to causes
hereafter to be shown, two Spaniards, in the dress of sailors, and
conspicuously showing themselves, were killed; not by volleys, but by
deliberate marksman’s shots; while, as it afterwards appeared, by one
of the general discharges, Atufal, the black, and the Spaniard at the
helm likewise were killed. What now, with the loss of the sails, and
loss of leaders, the ship became unmanageable to the negroes.

With creaking masts, she came heavily round to the wind; the prow
slowly swinging into view of the boats, its skeleton gleaming in the
horizontal moonlight, and casting a gigantic ribbed shadow upon the
water. One extended arm of the ghost seemed beckoning the whites to
avenge it.

“Follow your leader!” cried the mate; and, one on each bow, the boats
boarded. Sealing-spears and cutlasses crossed hatchets and hand-spikes.
Huddled upon the long-boat amidships, the negresses raised a wailing
chant, whose chorus was the clash of the steel.

For a time, the attack wavered; the negroes wedging themselves to beat
it back; the half-repelled sailors, as yet unable to gain a footing,
fighting as troopers in the saddle, one leg sideways flung over the
bulwarks, and one without, plying their cutlasses like carters’ whips.
But in vain. They were almost overborne, when, rallying themselves into
a squad as one man, with a huzza, they sprang inboard, where,
entangled, they involuntarily separated again. For a few breaths’
space, there was a vague, muffled, inner sound, as of submerged
sword-fish rushing hither and thither through shoals of black-fish.
Soon, in a reunited band, and joined by the Spanish seamen, the whites
came to the surface, irresistibly driving the negroes toward the stern.
But a barricade of casks and sacks, from side to side, had been thrown
up by the main-mast. Here the negroes faced about, and though scorning
peace or truce, yet fain would have had respite. But, without pause,
overleaping the barrier, the unflagging sailors again closed.
Exhausted, the blacks now fought in despair. Their red tongues lolled,
wolf-like, from their black mouths. But the pale sailors’ teeth were
set; not a word was spoken; and, in five minutes more, the ship was
won.

Nearly a score of the negroes were killed. Exclusive of those by the
balls, many were mangled; their wounds—mostly inflicted by the
long-edged sealing-spears, resembling those shaven ones of the English
at Preston Pans, made by the poled scythes of the Highlanders. On the
other side, none were killed, though several were wounded; some
severely, including the mate. The surviving negroes were temporarily
secured, and the ship, towed back into the harbor at midnight, once
more lay anchored.

Omitting the incidents and arrangements ensuing, suffice it that, after
two days spent in refitting, the ships sailed in company for
Conception, in Chili, and thence for Lima, in Peru; where, before the
vice-regal courts, the whole affair, from the beginning, underwent
investigation.

Though, midway on the passage, the ill-fated Spaniard, relaxed from
constraint, showed some signs of regaining health with free-will; yet,
agreeably to his own foreboding, shortly before arriving at Lima, he
relapsed, finally becoming so reduced as to be carried ashore in arms.
Hearing of his story and plight, one of the many religious institutions
of the City of Kings opened an hospitable refuge to him, where both
physician and priest were his nurses, and a member of the order
volunteered to be his one special guardian and consoler, by night and
by day.

The following extracts, translated from one of the official Spanish
documents, will, it is hoped, shed light on the preceding narrative, as
well as, in the first place, reveal the true port of departure and true
history of the San Dominick’s voyage, down to the time of her touching
at the island of St. Maria.

But, ere the extracts come, it may be well to preface them with a
remark.

The document selected, from among many others, for partial translation,
contains the deposition of Benito Cereno; the first taken in the case.
Some disclosures therein were, at the time, held dubious for both
learned and natural reasons. The tribunal inclined to the opinion that
the deponent, not undisturbed in his mind by recent events, raved of
some things which could never have happened. But subsequent depositions
of the surviving sailors, bearing out the revelations of their captain
in several of the strangest particulars, gave credence to the rest. So
that the tribunal, in its final decision, rested its capital sentences
upon statements which, had they lacked confirmation, it would have
deemed it but duty to reject.


I, DON JOSE DE ABOS AND PADILLA, His Majesty’s Notary for the Royal
Revenue, and Register of this Province, and Notary Public of the Holy
Crusade of this Bishopric, etc.

Do certify and declare, as much as is requisite in law, that, in the
criminal cause commenced the twenty-fourth of the month of September,
in the year seventeen hundred and ninety-nine, against the negroes of
the ship San Dominick, the following declaration before me was made:

_Declaration of the first witness_, DON BENITO CERENO.


The same day, and month, and year, His Honor, Doctor Juan Martinez de
Rozas, Councilor of the Royal Audience of this Kingdom, and learned in
the law of this Intendency, ordered the captain of the ship San
Dominick, Don Benito Cereno, to appear; which he did, in his litter,
attended by the monk Infelez; of whom he received the oath, which he
took by God, our Lord, and a sign of the Cross; under which he promised
to tell the truth of whatever he should know and should be asked;—and
being interrogated agreeably to the tenor of the act commencing the
process, he said, that on the twentieth of May last, he set sail with
his ship from the port of Valparaiso, bound to that of Callao; loaded
with the produce of the country beside thirty cases of hardware and one
hundred and sixty blacks, of both sexes, mostly belonging to Don
Alexandro Aranda, gentleman, of the city of Mendoza; that the crew of
the ship consisted of thirty-six men, beside the persons who went as
passengers; that the negroes were in part as follows:

[_Here, in the original, follows a list of some fifty names,
descriptions, and ages, compiled from certain recovered documents of
Aranda’s, and also from recollections of the deponent, from which
portions only are extracted._]


—One, from about eighteen to nineteen years, named José, and this was
the man that waited upon his master, Don Alexandro, and who speaks well
the Spanish, having served him four or five years; * * * a mulatto,
named Francesco, the cabin steward, of a good person and voice, having
sung in the Valparaiso churches, native of the province of Buenos
Ayres, aged about thirty-five years. * * * A smart negro, named Dago,
who had been for many years a grave-digger among the Spaniards, aged
forty-six years. * * * Four old negroes, born in Africa, from sixty to
seventy, but sound, calkers by trade, whose names are as follows:—the
first was named Muri, and he was killed (as was also his son named
Diamelo); the second, Nacta; the third, Yola, likewise killed; the
fourth, Ghofan; and six full-grown negroes, aged from thirty to
forty-five, all raw, and born among the Ashantees—Matiluqui, Yan,
Leche, Mapenda, Yambaio, Akim; four of whom were killed; * * * a
powerful negro named Atufal, who being supposed to have been a chief in
Africa, his owner set great store by him. * * * And a small negro of
Senegal, but some years among the Spaniards, aged about thirty, which
negro’s name was Babo; * * * that he does not remember the names of the
others, but that still expecting the residue of Don Alexandra’s papers
will be found, will then take due account of them all, and remit to the
court; * * * and thirty-nine women and children of all ages.

[_The catalogue over, the deposition goes on_]


* * * That all the negroes slept upon deck, as is customary in this
navigation, and none wore fetters, because the owner, his friend
Aranda, told him that they were all tractable; * * * that on the
seventh day after leaving port, at three o’clock in the morning, all
the Spaniards being asleep except the two officers on the watch, who
were the boatswain, Juan Robles, and the carpenter, Juan Bautista
Gayete, and the helmsman and his boy, the negroes revolted suddenly,
wounded dangerously the boatswain and the carpenter, and successively
killed eighteen men of those who were sleeping upon deck, some with
hand-spikes and hatchets, and others by throwing them alive overboard,
after tying them; that of the Spaniards upon deck, they left about
seven, as he thinks, alive and tied, to manoeuvre the ship, and three
or four more, who hid themselves, remained also alive. Although in the
act of revolt the negroes made themselves masters of the hatchway, six
or seven wounded went through it to the cockpit, without any hindrance
on their part; that during the act of revolt, the mate and another
person, whose name he does not recollect, attempted to come up through
the hatchway, but being quickly wounded, were obliged to return to the
cabin; that the deponent resolved at break of day to come up the
companion-way, where the negro Babo was, being the ringleader, and
Atufal, who assisted him, and having spoken to them, exhorted them to
cease committing such atrocities, asking them, at the same time, what
they wanted and intended to do, offering, himself, to obey their
commands; that notwithstanding this, they threw, in his presence, three
men, alive and tied, overboard; that they told the deponent to come up,
and that they would not kill him; which having done, the negro Babo
asked him whether there were in those seas any negro countries where
they might be carried, and he answered them, No; that the negro Babo
afterwards told him to carry them to Senegal, or to the neighboring
islands of St. Nicholas; and he answered, that this was impossible, on
account of the great distance, the necessity involved of rounding Cape
Horn, the bad condition of the vessel, the want of provisions, sails,
and water; but that the negro Babo replied to him he must carry them in
any way; that they would do and conform themselves to everything the
deponent should require as to eating and drinking; that after a long
conference, being absolutely compelled to please them, for they
threatened to kill all the whites if they were not, at all events,
carried to Senegal, he told them that what was most wanting for the
voyage was water; that they would go near the coast to take it, and
thence they would proceed on their course; that the negro Babo agreed
to it; and the deponent steered towards the intermediate ports, hoping
to meet some Spanish, or foreign vessel that would save them; that
within ten or eleven days they saw the land, and continued their course
by it in the vicinity of Nasca; that the deponent observed that the
negroes were now restless and mutinous, because he did not effect the
taking in of water, the negro Babo having required, with threats, that
it should be done, without fail, the following day; he told him he saw
plainly that the coast was steep, and the rivers designated in the maps
were not to be found, with other reasons suitable to the circumstances;
that the best way would be to go to the island of Santa Maria, where
they might water easily, it being a solitary island, as the foreigners
did; that the deponent did not go to Pisco, that was near, nor make any
other port of the coast, because the negro Babo had intimated to him
several times, that he would kill all the whites the very moment he
should perceive any city, town, or settlement of any kind on the shores
to which they should be carried: that having determined to go to the
island of Santa Maria, as the deponent had planned, for the purpose of
trying whether, on the passage or near the island itself, they could
find any vessel that should favor them, or whether he could escape from
it in a boat to the neighboring coast of Arruco, to adopt the necessary
means he immediately changed his course, steering for the island; that
the negroes Babo and Atufal held daily conferences, in which they
discussed what was necessary for their design of returning to Senegal,
whether they were to kill all the Spaniards, and particularly the
deponent; that eight days after parting from the coast of Nasca, the
deponent being on the watch a little after day-break, and soon after
the negroes had their meeting, the negro Babo came to the place where
the deponent was, and told him that he had determined to kill his
master, Don Alexandro Aranda, both because he and his companions could
not otherwise be sure of their liberty, and that to keep the seamen in
subjection, he wanted to prepare a warning of what road they should be
made to take did they or any of them oppose him; and that, by means of
the death of Don Alexandro, that warning would best be given; but, that
what this last meant, the deponent did not at the time comprehend, nor
could not, further than that the death of Don Alexandro was intended;
and moreover the negro Babo proposed to the deponent to call the mate
Raneds, who was sleeping in the cabin, before the thing was done, for
fear, as the deponent understood it, that the mate, who was a good
navigator, should be killed with Don Alexandro and the rest; that the
deponent, who was the friend, from youth, of Don Alexandro, prayed and
conjured, but all was useless; for the negro Babo answered him that the
thing could not be prevented, and that all the Spaniards risked their
death if they should attempt to frustrate his will in this matter, or
any other; that, in this conflict, the deponent called the mate,
Raneds, who was forced to go apart, and immediately the negro Babo
commanded the Ashantee Martinqui and the Ashantee Lecbe to go and
commit the murder; that those two went down with hatchets to the berth
of Don Alexandro; that, yet half alive and mangled, they dragged him on
deck; that they were going to throw him overboard in that state, but
the negro Babo stopped them, bidding the murder be completed on the
deck before him, which was done, when, by his orders, the body was
carried below, forward; that nothing more was seen of it by the
deponent for three days; * * * that Don Alonzo Sidonia, an old man,
long resident at Valparaiso, and lately appointed to a civil office in
Peru, whither he had taken passage, was at the time sleeping in the
berth opposite Don Alexandro’s; that awakening at his cries, surprised
by them, and at the sight of the negroes with their bloody hatchets in
their hands, he threw himself into the sea through a window which was
near him, and was drowned, without it being in the power of the
deponent to assist or take him up; * * * that a short time after
killing Aranda, they brought upon deck his german-cousin, of
middle-age, Don Francisco Masa, of Mendoza, and the young Don Joaquin,
Marques de Aramboalaza, then lately from Spain, with his Spanish
servant Ponce, and the three young clerks of Aranda, José Mozairi
Lorenzo Bargas, and Hermenegildo Gandix, all of Cadiz; that Don Joaquin
and Hermenegildo Gandix, the negro Babo, for purposes hereafter to
appear, preserved alive; but Don Francisco Masa, José Mozairi, and
Lorenzo Bargas, with Ponce the servant, beside the boatswain, Juan
Robles, the boatswain’s mates, Manuel Viscaya and Roderigo Hurta, and
four of the sailors, the negro Babo ordered to be thrown alive into the
sea, although they made no resistance, nor begged for anything else but
mercy; that the boatswain, Juan Robles, who knew how to swim, kept the
longest above water, making acts of contrition, and, in the last words
he uttered, charged this deponent to cause mass to be said for his soul
to our Lady of Succor: * * * that, during the three days which
followed, the deponent, uncertain what fate had befallen the remains of
Don Alexandro, frequently asked the negro Babo where they were, and, if
still on board, whether they were to be preserved for interment ashore,
entreating him so to order it; that the negro Babo answered nothing
till the fourth day, when at sunrise, the deponent coming on deck, the
negro Babo showed him a skeleton, which had been substituted for the
ship’s proper figure-head—the image of Christopher Colon, the
discoverer of the New World; that the negro Babo asked him whose
skeleton that was, and whether, from its whiteness, he should not think
it a white’s; that, upon discovering his face, the negro Babo, coming
close, said words to this effect: “Keep faith with the blacks from here
to Senegal, or you shall in spirit, as now in body, follow your
leader,” pointing to the prow; * * * that the same morning the negro
Babo took by succession each Spaniard forward, and asked him whose
skeleton that was, and whether, from its whiteness, he should not think
it a white’s; that each Spaniard covered his face; that then to each
the negro Babo repeated the words in the first place said to the
deponent; * * * that they (the Spaniards), being then assembled aft,
the negro Babo harangued them, saying that he had now done all; that
the deponent (as navigator for the negroes) might pursue his course,
warning him and all of them that they should, soul and body, go the way
of Don Alexandro, if he saw them (the Spaniards) speak, or plot
anything against them (the negroes)—a threat which was repeated every
day; that, before the events last mentioned, they had tied the cook to
throw him overboard, for it is not known what thing they heard him
speak, but finally the negro Babo spared his life, at the request of
the deponent; that a few days after, the deponent, endeavoring not to
omit any means to preserve the lives of the remaining whites, spoke to
the negroes peace and tranquillity, and agreed to draw up a paper,
signed by the deponent and the sailors who could write, as also by the
negro Babo, for himself and all the blacks, in which the deponent
obliged himself to carry them to Senegal, and they not to kill any
more, and he formally to make over to them the ship, with the cargo,
with which they were for that time satisfied and quieted. * * But the
next day, the more surely to guard against the sailors’ escape, the
negro Babo commanded all the boats to be destroyed but the long-boat,
which was unseaworthy, and another, a cutter in good condition, which
knowing it would yet be wanted for towing the water casks, he had it
lowered down into the hold.


[_Various particulars of the prolonged and perplexed navigation ensuing
here follow, with incidents of a calamitous calm, from which portion
one passage is extracted, to wit_:]


—That on the fifth day of the calm, all on board suffering much from
the heat, and want of water, and five having died in fits, and mad, the
negroes became irritable, and for a chance gesture, which they deemed
suspicious—though it was harmless—made by the mate, Raneds, to the
deponent in the act of handing a quadrant, they killed him; but that
for this they afterwards were sorry, the mate being the only remaining
navigator on board, except the deponent.


—That omitting other events, which daily happened, and which can only
serve uselessly to recall past misfortunes and conflicts, after
seventy-three days’ navigation, reckoned from the time they sailed from
Nasca, during which they navigated under a scanty allowance of water,
and were afflicted with the calms before mentioned, they at last
arrived at the island of Santa Maria, on the seventeenth of the month
of August, at about six o’clock in the afternoon, at which hour they
cast anchor very near the American ship, Bachelor’s Delight, which lay
in the same bay, commanded by the generous Captain Amasa Delano; but at
six o’clock in the morning, they had already descried the port, and the
negroes became uneasy, as soon as at distance they saw the ship, not
having expected to see one there; that the negro Babo pacified them,
assuring them that no fear need be had; that straightway he ordered the
figure on the bow to be covered with canvas, as for repairs and had the
decks a little set in order; that for a time the negro Babo and the
negro Atufal conferred; that the negro Atufal was for sailing away, but
the negro Babo would not, and, by himself, cast about what to do; that
at last he came to the deponent, proposing to him to say and do all
that the deponent declares to have said and done to the American
captain; * * * * * * * that the negro Babo warned him that if he varied
in the least, or uttered any word, or gave any look that should give
the least intimation of the past events or present state, he would
instantly kill him, with all his companions, showing a dagger, which he
carried hid, saying something which, as he understood it, meant that
that dagger would be alert as his eye; that the negro Babo then
announced the plan to all his companions, which pleased them; that he
then, the better to disguise the truth, devised many expedients, in
some of them uniting deceit and defense; that of this sort was the
device of the six Ashantees before named, who were his bravoes; that
them he stationed on the break of the poop, as if to clean certain
hatchets (in cases, which were part of the cargo), but in reality to
use them, and distribute them at need, and at a given word he told
them; that, among other devices, was the device of presenting Atufal,
his right hand man, as chained, though in a moment the chains could be
dropped; that in every particular he informed the deponent what part he
was expected to enact in every device, and what story he was to tell on
every occasion, always threatening him with instant death if he varied
in the least: that, conscious that many of the negroes would be
turbulent, the negro Babo appointed the four aged negroes, who were
calkers, to keep what domestic order they could on the decks; that
again and again he harangued the Spaniards and his companions,
informing them of his intent, and of his devices, and of the invented
story that this deponent was to tell; charging them lest any of them
varied from that story; that these arrangements were made and matured
during the interval of two or three hours, between their first sighting
the ship and the arrival on board of Captain Amasa Delano; that this
happened about half-past seven o’clock in the morning, Captain Amasa
Delano coming in his boat, and all gladly receiving him; that the
deponent, as well as he could force himself, acting then the part of
principal owner, and a free captain of the ship, told Captain Amasa
Delano, when called upon, that he came from Buenos Ayres, bound to
Lima, with three hundred negroes; that off Cape Horn, and in a
subsequent fever, many negroes had died; that also, by similar
casualties, all the sea officers and the greatest part of the crew had
died.


[_And so the deposition goes on, circumstantially recounting the
fictitious story dictated to the deponent by Babo, and through the
deponent imposed upon Captain Delano; and also recounting the friendly
offers of Captain Delano, with other things, but all of which is here
omitted. After the fictitious story, etc. the deposition proceeds_:]


—that the generous Captain Amasa Delano remained on board all the day,
till he left the ship anchored at six o’clock in the evening, deponent
speaking to him always of his pretended misfortunes, under the
fore-mentioned principles, without having had it in his power to tell a
single word, or give him the least hint, that he might know the truth
and state of things; because the negro Babo, performing the office of
an officious servant with all the appearance of submission of the
humble slave, did not leave the deponent one moment; that this was in
order to observe the deponent’s actions and words, for the negro Babo
understands well the Spanish; and besides, there were thereabout some
others who were constantly on the watch, and likewise understood the
Spanish; * * * that upon one occasion, while deponent was standing on
the deck conversing with Amasa Delano, by a secret sign the negro Babo
drew him (the deponent) aside, the act appearing as if originating with
the deponent; that then, he being drawn aside, the negro Babo proposed
to him to gain from Amasa Delano full particulars about his ship, and
crew, and arms; that the deponent asked “For what?” that the negro Babo
answered he might conceive; that, grieved at the prospect of what might
overtake the generous Captain Amasa Delano, the deponent at first
refused to ask the desired questions, and used every argument to induce
the negro Babo to give up this new design; that the negro Babo showed
the point of his dagger; that, after the information had been obtained
the negro Babo again drew him aside, telling him that that very night
he (the deponent) would be captain of two ships, instead of one, for
that, great part of the American’s ship’s crew being to be absent
fishing, the six Ashantees, without any one else, would easily take it;
that at this time he said other things to the same purpose; that no
entreaties availed; that, before Amasa Delano’s coming on board, no
hint had been given touching the capture of the American ship: that to
prevent this project the deponent was powerless; * * *—that in some
things his memory is confused, he cannot distinctly recall every event;
* * *—that as soon as they had cast anchor at six of the clock in the
evening, as has before been stated, the American Captain took leave, to
return to his vessel; that upon a sudden impulse, which the deponent
believes to have come from God and his angels, he, after the farewell
had been said, followed the generous Captain Amasa Delano as far as the
gunwale, where he stayed, under pretense of taking leave, until Amasa
Delano should have been seated in his boat; that on shoving off, the
deponent sprang from the gunwale into the boat, and fell into it, he
knows not how, God guarding him; that—


[_Here, in the original, follows the account of what further happened
at the escape, and how the San Dominick was retaken, and of the passage
to the coast; including in the recital many expressions of “eternal
gratitude” to the “generous Captain Amasa Delano.” The deposition then
proceeds with recapitulatory remarks, and a partial renumeration of the
negroes, making record of their individual part in the past events,
with a view to furnishing, according to command of the court, the data
whereon to found the criminal sentences to be pronounced. From this
portion is the following_;]


—That he believes that all the negroes, though not in the first place
knowing to the design of revolt, when it was accomplished, approved it.
* * * That the negro, José, eighteen years old, and in the personal
service of Don Alexandro, was the one who communicated the information
to the negro Babo, about the state of things in the cabin, before the
revolt; that this is known, because, in the preceding midnight, he use
to come from his berth, which was under his master’s, in the cabin, to
the deck where the ringleader and his associates were, and had secret
conversations with the negro Babo, in which he was several times seen
by the mate; that, one night, the mate drove him away twice; * * that
this same negro José was the one who, without being commanded to do so
by the negro Babo, as Lecbe and Martinqui were, stabbed his master, Don
Alexandro, after he had been dragged half-lifeless to the deck; * *
that the mulatto steward, Francesco, was of the first band of
revolters, that he was, in all things, the creature and tool of the
negro Babo; that, to make his court, he, just before a repast in the
cabin, proposed, to the negro Babo, poisoning a dish for the generous
Captain Amasa Delano; this is known and believed, because the negroes
have said it; but that the negro Babo, having another design, forbade
Francesco; * * that the Ashantee Lecbe was one of the worst of them;
for that, on the day the ship was retaken, he assisted in the defense
of her, with a hatchet in each hand, with one of which he wounded, in
the breast, the chief mate of Amasa Delano, in the first act of
boarding; this all knew; that, in sight of the deponent, Lecbe struck,
with a hatchet, Don Francisco Masa, when, by the negro Babo’s orders,
he was carrying him to throw him overboard, alive, beside participating
in the murder, before mentioned, of Don Alexandro Aranda, and others of
the cabin-passengers; that, owing to the fury with which the Ashantees
fought in the engagement with the boats, but this Lecbe and Yan
survived; that Yan was bad as Lecbe; that Yan was the man who, by
Babo’s command, willingly prepared the skeleton of Don Alexandro, in a
way the negroes afterwards told the deponent, but which he, so long as
reason is left him, can never divulge; that Yan and Lecbe were the two
who, in a calm by night, riveted the skeleton to the bow; this also the
negroes told him; that the negro Babo was he who traced the inscription
below it; that the negro Babo was the plotter from first to last; he
ordered every murder, and was the helm and keel of the revolt; that
Atufal was his lieutenant in all; but Atufal, with his own hand,
committed no murder; nor did the negro Babo; * * that Atufal was shot,
being killed in the fight with the boats, ere boarding; * * that the
negresses, of age, were knowing to the revolt, and testified themselves
satisfied at the death of their master, Don Alexandro; that, had the
negroes not restrained them, they would have tortured to death, instead
of simply killing, the Spaniards slain by command of the negro Babo;
that the negresses used their utmost influence to have the deponent
made away with; that, in the various acts of murder, they sang songs
and danced—not gaily, but solemnly; and before the engagement with the
boats, as well as during the action, they sang melancholy songs to the
negroes, and that this melancholy tone was more inflaming than a
different one would have been, and was so intended; that all this is
believed, because the negroes have said it.—that of the thirty-six men
of the crew, exclusive of the passengers (all of whom are now dead),
which the deponent had knowledge of, six only remained alive, with four
cabin-boys and ship-boys, not included with the crew; * *—that the
negroes broke an arm of one of the cabin-boys and gave him strokes with
hatchets.

[_Then follow various random disclosures referring to various periods
of time. The following are extracted_;]


—That during the presence of Captain Amasa Delano on board, some
attempts were made by the sailors, and one by Hermenegildo Gandix, to
convey hints to him of the true state of affairs; but that these
attempts were ineffectual, owing to fear of incurring death, and,
futhermore, owing to the devices which offered contradictions to the
true state of affairs, as well as owing to the generosity and piety of
Amasa Delano incapable of sounding such wickedness; * * * that Luys
Galgo, a sailor about sixty years of age, and formerly of the king’s
navy, was one of those who sought to convey tokens to Captain Amasa
Delano; but his intent, though undiscovered, being suspected, he was,
on a pretense, made to retire out of sight, and at last into the hold,
and there was made away with. This the negroes have since said; * * *
that one of the ship-boys feeling, from Captain Amasa Delano’s
presence, some hopes of release, and not having enough prudence,
dropped some chance-word respecting his expectations, which being
overheard and understood by a slave-boy with whom he was eating at the
time, the latter struck him on the head with a knife, inflicting a bad
wound, but of which the boy is now healing; that likewise, not long
before the ship was brought to anchor, one of the seamen, steering at
the time, endangered himself by letting the blacks remark some
expression in his countenance, arising from a cause similar to the
above; but this sailor, by his heedful after conduct, escaped; * * *
that these statements are made to show the court that from the
beginning to the end of the revolt, it was impossible for the deponent
and his men to act otherwise than they did; * * *—that the third clerk,
Hermenegildo Gandix, who before had been forced to live among the
seamen, wearing a seaman’s habit, and in all respects appearing to be
one for the time; he, Gandix, was killed by a musket ball fired through
mistake from the boats before boarding; having in his fright run up the
mizzen-rigging, calling to the boats—“don’t board,” lest upon their
boarding the negroes should kill him; that this inducing the Americans
to believe he some way favored the cause of the negroes, they fired two
balls at him, so that he fell wounded from the rigging, and was drowned
in the sea; * * *—that the young Don Joaquin, Marques de Aramboalaza,
like Hermenegildo Gandix, the third clerk, was degraded to the office
and appearance of a common seaman; that upon one occasion when Don
Joaquin shrank, the negro Babo commanded the Ashantee Lecbe to take tar
and heat it, and pour it upon Don Joaquin’s hands; * * *—that Don
Joaquin was killed owing to another mistake of the Americans, but one
impossible to be avoided, as upon the approach of the boats, Don
Joaquin, with a hatchet tied edge out and upright to his hand, was made
by the negroes to appear on the bulwarks; whereupon, seen with arms in
his hands and in a questionable attitude, he was shot for a renegade
seaman; * * *—that on the person of Don Joaquin was found secreted a
jewel, which, by papers that were discovered, proved to have been meant
for the shrine of our Lady of Mercy in Lima; a votive offering,
beforehand prepared and guarded, to attest his gratitude, when he
should have landed in Peru, his last destination, for the safe
conclusion of his entire voyage from Spain; * * *—that the jewel, with
the other effects of the late Don Joaquin, is in the custody of the
brethren of the Hospital de Sacerdotes, awaiting the disposition of the
honorable court; * * *—that, owing to the condition of the deponent, as
well as the haste in which the boats departed for the attack, the
Americans were not forewarned that there were, among the apparent crew,
a passenger and one of the clerks disguised by the negro Babo; * *
*—that, beside the negroes killed in the action, some were killed after
the capture and re-anchoring at night, when shackled to the ring-bolts
on deck; that these deaths were committed by the sailors, ere they
could be prevented. That so soon as informed of it, Captain Amasa
Delano used all his authority, and, in particular with his own hand,
struck down Martinez Gola, who, having found a razor in the pocket of
an old jacket of his, which one of the shackled negroes had on, was
aiming it at the negro’s throat; that the noble Captain Amasa Delano
also wrenched from the hand of Bartholomew Barlo a dagger, secreted at
the time of the massacre of the whites, with which he was in the act of
stabbing a shackled negro, who, the same day, with another negro, had
thrown him down and jumped upon him; * * *—that, for all the events,
befalling through so long a time, during which the ship was in the
hands of the negro Babo, he cannot here give account; but that, what he
has said is the most substantial of what occurs to him at present, and
is the truth under the oath which he has taken; which declaration he
affirmed and ratified, after hearing it read to him.

He said that he is twenty-nine years of age, and broken in body and
mind; that when finally dismissed by the court, he shall not return
home to Chili, but betake himself to the monastery on Mount Agonia
without; and signed with his honor, and crossed himself, and, for the
time, departed as he came, in his litter, with the monk Infelez, to the
Hospital de Sacerdotes.

BENITO CERENO.


DOCTOR ROZAS.


If the Deposition have served as the key to fit into the lock of the
complications which precede it, then, as a vault whose door has been
flung back, the San Dominick’s hull lies open to-day.

Hitherto the nature of this narrative, besides rendering the
intricacies in the beginning unavoidable, has more or less required
that many things, instead of being set down in the order of occurrence,
should be retrospectively, or irregularly given; this last is the case
with the following passages, which will conclude the account:

During the long, mild voyage to Lima, there was, as before hinted, a
period during which the sufferer a little recovered his health, or, at
least in some degree, his tranquillity. Ere the decided relapse which
came, the two captains had many cordial conversations—their fraternal
unreserve in singular contrast with former withdrawments.

Again and again it was repeated, how hard it had been to enact the part
forced on the Spaniard by Babo.

“Ah, my dear friend,” Don Benito once said, “at those very times when
you thought me so morose and ungrateful, nay, when, as you now admit,
you half thought me plotting your murder, at those very times my heart
was frozen; I could not look at you, thinking of what, both on board
this ship and your own, hung, from other hands, over my kind
benefactor. And as God lives, Don Amasa, I know not whether desire for
my own safety alone could have nerved me to that leap into your boat,
had it not been for the thought that, did you, unenlightened, return to
your ship, you, my best friend, with all who might be with you, stolen
upon, that night, in your hammocks, would never in this world have
wakened again. Do but think how you walked this deck, how you sat in
this cabin, every inch of ground mined into honey-combs under you. Had
I dropped the least hint, made the least advance towards an
understanding between us, death, explosive death—yours as mine—would
have ended the scene.”

“True, true,” cried Captain Delano, starting, “you have saved my life,
Don Benito, more than I yours; saved it, too, against my knowledge and
will.”

“Nay, my friend,” rejoined the Spaniard, courteous even to the point of
religion, “God charmed your life, but you saved mine. To think of some
things you did—those smilings and chattings, rash pointings and
gesturings. For less than these, they slew my mate, Raneds; but you had
the Prince of Heaven’s safe-conduct through all ambuscades.”

“Yes, all is owing to Providence, I know: but the temper of my mind
that morning was more than commonly pleasant, while the sight of so
much suffering, more apparent than real, added to my good-nature,
compassion, and charity, happily interweaving the three. Had it been
otherwise, doubtless, as you hint, some of my interferences might have
ended unhappily enough. Besides, those feelings I spoke of enabled me
to get the better of momentary distrust, at times when acuteness might
have cost me my life, without saving another’s. Only at the end did my
suspicions get the better of me, and you know how wide of the mark they
then proved.”

“Wide, indeed,” said Don Benito, sadly; “you were with me all day;
stood with me, sat with me, talked with me, looked at me, ate with me,
drank with me; and yet, your last act was to clutch for a monster, not
only an innocent man, but the most pitiable of all men. To such degree
may malign machinations and deceptions impose. So far may even the best
man err, in judging the conduct of one with the recesses of whose
condition he is not acquainted. But you were forced to it; and you were
in time undeceived. Would that, in both respects, it was so ever, and
with all men.”

“You generalize, Don Benito; and mournfully enough. But the past is
passed; why moralize upon it? Forget it. See, yon bright sun has
forgotten it all, and the blue sea, and the blue sky; these have turned
over new leaves.”

“Because they have no memory,” he dejectedly replied; “because they are
not human.”

“But these mild trades that now fan your cheek, do they not come with a
human-like healing to you? Warm friends, steadfast friends are the
trades.”

“With their steadfastness they but waft me to my tomb, Señor,” was the
foreboding response.

“You are saved,” cried Captain Delano, more and more astonished and
pained; “you are saved: what has cast such a shadow upon you?”

“The negro.”

There was silence, while the moody man sat, slowly and unconsciously
gathering his mantle about him, as if it were a pall.

There was no more conversation that day.

But if the Spaniard’s melancholy sometimes ended in muteness upon
topics like the above, there were others upon which he never spoke at
all; on which, indeed, all his old reserves were piled. Pass over the
worst, and, only to elucidate let an item or two of these be cited. The
dress, so precise and costly, worn by him on the day whose events have
been narrated, had not willingly been put on. And that silver-mounted
sword, apparent symbol of despotic command, was not, indeed, a sword,
but the ghost of one. The scabbard, artificially stiffened, was empty.

As for the black—whose brain, not body, had schemed and led the revolt,
with the plot—his slight frame, inadequate to that which it held, had
at once yielded to the superior muscular strength of his captor, in the
boat. Seeing all was over, he uttered no sound, and could not be forced
to. His aspect seemed to say, since I cannot do deeds, I will not speak
words. Put in irons in the hold, with the rest, he was carried to Lima.
During the passage, Don Benito did not visit him. Nor then, nor at any
time after, would he look at him. Before the tribunal he refused. When
pressed by the judges he fainted. On the testimony of the sailors alone
rested the legal identity of Babo.

Some months after, dragged to the gibbet at the tail of a mule, the
black met his voiceless end. The body was burned to ashes; but for many
days, the head, that hive of subtlety, fixed on a pole in the Plaza,
met, unabashed, the gaze of the whites; and across the Plaza looked
towards St. Bartholomew’s church, in whose vaults slept then, as now,
the recovered bones of Aranda: and across the Rimac bridge looked
towards the monastery, on Mount Agonia without; where, three months
after being dismissed by the court, Benito Cereno, borne on the bier,
did, indeed, follow his leader.




